<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>An Appeal to the People in Behalf of Their Rights as Authorized Interpreters of the Bible</title>
      <author><name reg="Beecher, Catharine E.">Catharine E. Beecher</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>January 10, 2018</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">56354</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
        most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
        whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
        the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
        www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
        to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-01-10">January 10, 2018</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Larry B. Harrison, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This book was produced from scanned images of public
            domain material from the Google Books project.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">An Appeal to the People in Behalf of Their Rights as Authorized Interpreters of The Bible</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">by Catharine E. Beecher</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Author of <q>Common Sense Applied to Religion,</q> <q>Domestic
Economy,</q> <q>Domestic Receipt-Book,</q> <q>Letters to the
People on Health and Happiness,</q> <q>Physiology
and Calisthenics,</q> Etc., Etc.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Harper &amp; Brothers, Publishers</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1860</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
    <figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
    <figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
    </figure>
</p>
</div>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div>

<ab>
TO
</ab>

<ab>
The Editors of the Secular Press,
</ab>

<ab>
THE TRUE TRIBUNES OF THE PEOPLE,
</ab>

<ab>
CALLED OF GOD IN BEHALF OF THE COMMONWEALTH
</ab>

<ab>
TO DEFEND
</ab>

<ab>
LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE, FREEDOM OF SPEECH,
</ab>

<ab>
AND THE RIGHT OF ALL TO
</ab>

<ab>
INTERPRET THE BIBLE FOR THEMSELVES,
</ab>

<ab>
UNRESTRAINED BY ANY ECCLESIASTICAL POWER,
</ab>

<ab>
THIS VOLUME
</ab>

<ab>
IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED.
</ab>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Introduction.</head>

<p>
There is an obvious crisis approaching, in the religious
world, on questions of the highest moment.
In past time such periods of change have been preceded
by a slow and silent preparation, in which multitudes
have been led into the same course of thought
and feeling. Then, as the crisis approached, some
efficient leader lifted the last stone which sustained the
protecting dyke, and rode on the summit of the in-rushing
tide to notoriety and influence. Thus it was
in the day of Luther, in the day of Wesley, and at
other periods of religious movement.
</p>

<p>
At the present time there are indications of a great
impending change, which has been preceded by a long
course of unobserved preparation. But it is believed
that, in this case, it is not to be exhibited, like former
ones, by leaders forming new sects and parties, amid
more or less of conflict and commotion, but by the
agency of <emph>the people</emph>, and by a healthful, quiet process,
which, like leaven, shall gradually assimilate surrounding
particles till the whole be leavened.
</p>

<p>
The matter involved is the great question of questions,
to each individual for himself, and to every
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
parent and educator for their children: <q>What must
we <hi rend='smallcaps'>do</hi> to be saved?</q>
</p>

<p>
It is the object of this volume to show that the
answer to this great question has, for ages, been involved
in mystery and difficulty by means of a
<emph>philosophical theory</emph> to account for the <q>origin of evil,</q>
which, in the fifth century, was forced on the people
by popes and ecclesiastical councils, and which has
been sustained by persecution ever since&mdash;that this
theory is the basis of a system of religious doctrine
incorporated into creeds and churches, which is so
contrary to the moral sense of humanity, that theologians
have failed to render it consistent and satisfactory,
even to themselves&mdash;that <emph>the people</emph> are endowed
with <emph>principles of common sense</emph> by which they can
educe from the works of God a system of natural
religion far superior, which system is briefly set forth,
and also the tendencies of the two opposing systems&mdash;that
<emph>both</emph> systems are so incorporated into church
creeds, and into theological teachings, that they are a
compound of contradictions, and all the great religious
controversies have been efforts to eviscerate the
false system from the true, while through the long
conflict, it is theologians who have proved the noble
confessors and martyrs for truth&mdash;that it is impossible
to establish the claims of the Bible, or of any other
writings, as <emph>revelations</emph> from the Creator, when the
Augustinian theory is made a part of their teachings;
so that the real question for the people, is <q>Bible or
no Bible</q>&mdash;that the leading theological teachers of the
chief sects in this country have virtually conceded
that this theory is sustained neither by common sense
nor the Bible; and, finally, that the people are about
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
to cast off this dogma, which for ages has darkened
the way to eternal life, and by applying the principles
of common sense to the Bible, thus establish its agreement
with the system of natural religion herein set
forth.
</p>

<p>
In conclusion, the indications of the predicted change
are set forth as they are manifested in the present
position of theologians&mdash;of the parochial clergy&mdash;of
the church&mdash;of educational interests&mdash;of women&mdash;of
<q>Young America</q>&mdash;and of the religious and secular
press.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Augustine Theory of the Origin of Evil.</head>

<p>
The theory in question was introduced into the
Christian church, as an article of faith, in the fifth century,
chiefly by the influence of Augustine, an African
bishop.
</p>

<p>
To understand how it was brought about, it is needful
to bear in mind the distinction between facts and
the philosophical theories that explain the <emph>how</emph> and
the <emph>why</emph> of these facts.
</p>

<p>
Christ and his Apostles taught the fact that all men
are sinners, and the way to escape from sin and its
penalties. As, at first, Christianity prevailed chiefly
among the uneducated, it was not till some three or
four hundred years after Christ, that the philosophy
of these facts agitated the churches. Augustine was
a man of powerful mind and great learning, and with
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
other philosophers, speculated as to <q>the origin of
evil,</q> or the <hi rend='smallcaps'>why</hi> and the <hi rend='smallcaps'>how</hi> all men came to be
sinners.
</p>

<p>
By the aid of a few misinterpreted passages in the
Bible, the following theory was introduced and mainly
by Augustine.
</p>

<div>
<head>The Augustinian Theory.</head>

<p>
The Creator has proved his power to make minds
with such <q>a holy nature</q> that they will have no propensity
to sin, by creating the minds of angels and of
Adam on this pattern. Adam having this holy nature,
with no propensity to sin, did sin, and, as a
penalty, or in consequence, all his posterity commence
existence without this holy nature, and with such a
depraved nature that every moral act is sin and only
sin until God regenerates each mind. This favor is
bestowed only on a certain <q>elect</q> number, whose
salvation was purchased by the sufferings and death
of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
The rest of the race, after death, are to continue an
existence of hopeless torment in hell.
</p>

<p>
This depraved nature is the <q>origin of evil;</q> that
is to say, it is <emph>the cause</emph> of all the sin and consequent
misery of our race in time and through eternity. It
is what is meant by the terms <q>total depravity,</q> and
<q>original sin</q> as used by theologians.
</p>

<p>
At first the pope and the church councils refused
this theory, but eventually, the Augustinian party triumphed;
Pelagius and his followers were persecuted
and driven out of the church, and thus this dogma
was established as a leading feature in all the creeds and
confessions of both Catholic and Protestant churches.
</p>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<p>
So thoroughly has it been adopted that, since the
time of Pelagius, there has been little discussion
among the great Christian sects on the theory itself.
These disputes have chiefly related to certain questions
connected with this dogma, which will next be
noticed.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Questions Connected with the Augustinian
Theory.</head>

<p>
In discussing the topics of this chapter it is needful
to refer to certain religious sects and parties of this
country in their relations to the subject.
</p>

<p>
The first class may be denominated the old school
Calvinists, embracing the Old School Presbyterian
churches, the Reformed Dutch and most of the Baptist
denominations.
</p>

<p>
Their views are ably presented by the theologians
of Princeton and their quarterly, and by the Baptist
theologians of the Newton Theological Seminary and
the Baptist periodicals.
</p>

<p>
The second class may be called the new school Calvinists,
embracing Congregational and New School
Presbyterian churches. These are ably represented in
New England by the Andover and New Haven Theological
Seminaries and their respective quarterlies;
and out of New England, by the Theological Seminaries
of Union and Lane, and their quarterly at
Philadelphia.
</p>

<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>

<p>
The third class are the Arminian sects, including
the Methodists and Episcopalians, whose views are
ably presented in their quarterlies and other periodicals
in New York and Philadelphia.
</p>

<div>
<head>In what does the depraved nature transmitted from
Adam consist?</head>

<p>
In seeking a definite and clear answer to the question,
what is the depraved nature transmitted from
Adam, we find so much vagueness and mistiness, that
it will be needful to state first what it <emph>is not</emph>, and then
it will be more easy to approximate to the affirmative
reply.
</p>

<p>
We find, then, that theologians teach that this depraved
nature does not consist in any of those constitutional
powers and faculties of mind, of which God
is the author. For they maintain that all that God
has made is perfect and right, and that he is not the
creator of that which is the cause or origin of sin, inasmuch
as this would make him <q>the author of sin,</q>
which they expressly deny. This depraved nature,
then, is something which God did not create. This is
what is affirmed when theologians say that they do
not teach a <q>physical depravity</q> which demands
<q>physical regeneration</q> on the part of God.
</p>

<p>
Then on the positive side, we find that this depraved
nature is something that mind can be created without,
for God made the angels and Adam without it.
</p>

<p>
It is something which does not prevent sinful action,
for Adam sinned before it existed.
</p>

<p>
It is something which God can at any time remedy,
at least to some extent, by regeneration.
</p>

<p>
It is something which makes every moral act of
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
every human being sin and only sin until regeneration
takes place.
</p>

<p>
It is something which man created himself, either
<emph>in</emph> Adam, or <emph>by</emph> Adam, or <emph>before</emph> Adam.
</p>

<p>
It is something which man never can or never will
rectify, so that he is entirely dependent on God for
the remedy.
</p>

<p>
It is something which most theologians describe as
<q>a bias,</q> or <q>a tendency,</q> or <q>a propensity,</q> or
<q>an inclination,</q> or <q>a proclivity</q> <emph>to sin</emph>, while its
opposite is called <emph>a holy nature</emph> which was created by
God, and which consists in a bias, tendency, propensity,
inclination or proclivity to holiness.
</p>

<p>
According to this, God created the holy nature of
angels and our first parents, and <emph>man</emph> caused the depraved
nature of all of Adam's posterity.
</p>

<p>
Some theologians attempt to define it as an <emph>unbalanced
state of the faculties</emph>, while holiness consists in the
perfect balance of the faculties. This balanced state
of the faculties conferred at his creation on Adam
has been withheld from all his descendants by a constitution
formed by God in consequence of Adam's
sin. Some theologians define this depravity as <emph>like</emph> a
habit. Others hold that it is a state of <emph>the will</emph>, sometimes
called a <emph>disposition</emph> or <emph>ruling purpose</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Some theologians teach that the presence of God's
Spirit, in the soul of man is indispensable to its right
action, and that his depraved nature is the result of
the <q>deprivation</q> of God's Spirit, which was bestowed
on Adam, and is withheld from his descendants on
account of his first sin. According to this view, a
holy mind is one which enjoys the presence of God's
Spirit, and a depraved mind is one that is deprived of it.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>

<div>
<head>Ability and Inability.</head>

<p>
The next question connected with the Augustine
theory is in regard to man's power or ability to obey
God.
</p>

<p>
The old school Calvinists hold that man has no
power of <emph>any</emph> kind to obey any of God's laws acceptably
until his depraved nature is regenerated by God,
and also that he has no power to do any thing that
has any tendency to secure regeneration. Every act
and feeling is sin and only sin from birth to regeneration.
</p>

<p>
The new school Calvinists hold that man has full
power to obey <emph>all</emph> that God requires, but that owing to
his depraved nature, he never will perform a morally
right act in a single instance, until regenerated, nor
will he do any thing that has any promise, or encouragement
from the Word of God, as tending to secure
regeneration. He is as entirely dependent on God
as if he had no power of any kind. And as the
inability, whether natural or moral, is all owing to the
depraved nature consequent on Adam's sin, the fact
that man has power to do what he never will do, only
adds to the misery of the condition thus entailed.
</p>

<p>
The Arminian sects agree in the fact that the sin of
Adam entailed such a depraved nature to all the race,
as more or less incapacitates for right moral action until
regeneration takes place.
</p>

<p>
The Episcopal Arminians hold to the Catholic view
that baptism in part remedies the effects of Adam's
sin, so that by the use of the means afforded by a
ministry regularly transmitted from the Apostles, the
unregenerate can gain eternal life.
</p>

<p>
The Methodist Arminians hold that depravity consists
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
in the <q><emph>deprivation</emph></q> of God's Spirit which was
given to Adam, and that the death of Christ has so
availed, that man now has some measure of this Spirit
restored before regeneration, so that all men have
power, by the use of certain appointed means of grace,
to gain regeneration.
</p>

<p>
The main point where the Calvinists and Arminians
differ is, that the Arminians teach that man has an appointed
mode for gaining regeneration, and the Calvinists
teach that he has not.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What is Regeneration?</head>

<p>
The next question is, in what does that great change
consist which is called regeneration, and which is indispensable
to salvation from eternal woe?
</p>

<p>
The old school Calvinists say it is a new nature
created by God which naturally acts right, in place of
a depraved nature which naturally acts wrong and
only wrong. With this new nature man has power to
obey God acceptably, and without it he has no power
of any kind.
</p>

<p>
The new school Calvinists say that regeneration is
a change of the depraved nature of man by God, attended
by a <emph>choice</emph> or <emph>ruling purpose</emph> to obey God in
all things made by man himself. They teach also
that man can and ought to make this choice without
any help from God in changing his depraved nature,
and yet, owing to this evil nature, he never will do so
till God changes it. Meantime God points out no certain
way of obtaining this indispensable aid from
him.<note place='foot'><ref target='Note_A'>Note A</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Arminians teach that regeneration consists either
in the implanting of a new nature by baptism, and
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
the use of other means of grace, or in the restoration
of God's Spirit which was withdrawn from man on
account of Adam's sin, and in some degree restored
by Christ's death.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What must we do to be saved?</head>

<p>
The next question for a race thus mournfully ruined
is, <q>What must we do to be saved?</q>
</p>

<p>
In reply, the old school Calvinist says, you can do
nothing at all. Whoever is saved will be regenerated
by God, without reference to any unregenerate doings.
It is all decided not by man in any way, but by the
<q>decrees</q> and <q>election</q> of God.
</p>

<p>
The new school Calvinist says, You <emph>can</emph> do all
that God requires, so as to be perfect in every thought,
word and deed, from the beginning of moral action to
the close of life, but you certainly never <emph>will</emph> feel or
do a single thing that is right and acceptable until
regenerated; nor will you ever do any thing to which
any promise is offered by God as that which will
secure his interference to regenerate. It is all decided,
not by man, but by the <q>decrees</q> and <q>election</q>
of God.
</p>

<p>
The Arminians say you can obtain regeneration
and eternal life, by the use of the means of grace set
forth in the Bible and by <q>the Church.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>True virtue, or right moral action.</head>

<p>
The next question is, what is true virtue, or right
moral action?
</p>

<p>
By <emph>moral action</emph> is meant the act of mind in <emph>choosing</emph>,
in distinction from intellectual and other acts of mind.
</p>

<p>
The Calvinists, both old and new school, teach that
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
true virtue, or right moral action in man, is choosing
to obey God's laws after regeneration takes place.
Previous to regeneration, every choice is sin and
has no moral goodness or rectitude. Thus truth, honesty,
justice, self-denial for the good of others, obedience
to parents, are all sin in an unregenerate mind,
and true virtue in the regenerate mind.
</p>

<p>
The Antinomian Calvinist goes so far as to claim
that <emph>every</emph> choice of a regenerate mind is right and
holy, just as every choice of the unregenerate is sin.
Thus the practice of the most hideous vices and crimes
becomes virtue in the regenerate.
</p>

<p>
But all other Calvinists maintain that after regeneration
we can and do sin, though previous to this
change no truly virtuous act is ever performed.
</p>

<p>
The Arminians hold that true virtue consists in
obeying God's laws, without reference to the question
of regeneration. They do not hold, as do all Calvinists,
that all the doings of the unregenerate are sinful,
and thus have no promise or encouragement in the
Bible as having an influence to secure regeneration.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Difficulties Involved in the Augustinian
Theory.</head>

<p>
The difficulties involved in the Augustinian theory
of <q>the origin of evil,</q> result from these facts. Our
only idea of a benevolent being is that wherever he
has the power to produce either happiness or misery,
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
he prefers to make happiness. Our only idea of a
malevolent being is that wherever he has this power
he prefers to make misery.
</p>

<p>
Consequently, the affirmation that all the sin and
misery of man is the result of a depraved nature
which the Creator has power both to prevent and to
remove, conveys no other idea than that God prefers
to make misery when he has power to make happiness,
and thus is a malevolent being.
</p>

<p>
If God would make all minds perfectly holy, as
theologians claim he has power to do, all sin would
cease. He chooses not to do so, but rather to perpetuate
the depraved nature transmitted from Adam,
which is <q>the origin of all evil.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now all classes of theologians who hold to the depravity
of man's nature consequent on Adam's sin,
agree that this is the cause or origin of all sin and its
consequent suffering.
</p>

<p>
They all agree, also, that God has proved his power
to make a perfectly holy nature in the case of angels
and of Adam, and that in consequence of the first sin
of Adam, every human mind begins to exist with a
depraved nature, according to a constitution of things
instituted by God.
</p>

<p>
They all agree that God can regenerate every human
mind, and that this boon is withheld, not for
want of <emph>power</emph>, but for want of <emph>will</emph> on the part of
God.
</p>

<p>
The difficulty that they have to meet is this&mdash;How
can the Creator, having done thus, be regarded as any
other than a malevolent being, the malignant and
hateful <q>author of sin,</q> and all its consequent sufferings?
</p>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<p>
The following exhibits the several modes of attempting
to meet this question.
</p>

<div>
<head>The Catholic Method.</head>

<p>
The first mode of meeting this difficulty is called
that of <emph>mystery</emph> and <emph>sovereignty</emph>. It is simply saying
that there is no explanation to be given. It is a mystery
that God as a sovereign does not choose to explain,
and it must be submitted to in uncomplaining
silence.
</p>

<p>
This is the Catholic mode which has been perpetuated
by many Protestants. It is the same method as
is adopted in defending the Catholic doctrine of <emph>transubstantiation</emph>.
</p>

<p>
All who do not resort to the Catholic mode of mystery
and sovereignty, endeavor to relieve the Creator
from the charge of being the author of sin by maintaining
that <emph>man made his own depraved nature</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This they set forth in the following ways:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Mode of Augustine and of President Edwards.</head>

<p>
Augustine, the father of this dreadful system, maintained
that all men had a common nature <emph>in</emph> Adam,
which was ruined by his act, after God had made this
common nature perfect. That is to say, every human
soul existed as a part of Adam, and thus his act was
the act of each and of all. This act vitiated the common
nature of all, and thus Adam and each of his
posterity caused the depravity of their common nature.
And thus, though God had the power to create
each mind as perfect as he created Adam's, still he is
not the author of sin.
</p>

<p>
President Edwards, the great New England theologian,
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
taught that all the minds of our race so existed in
Adam, and were so one with his mind, that when he
chose to eat the forbidden fruit, all his descendants
chose to do so too, and thus each man ruined his own
nature, and God is not the author of the evil.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Princeton Mode.</head>

<p>
The theologians of Princeton set forth the following
as the mode in which man caused his own depraved
nature:
</p>

<p>
God created Adam with a perfectly holy nature.
Adam sinned and ruined his own nature. God had
previously <q>made a covenant with Adam, not only
for himself, but for all his posterity, or in other words,
Adam having been placed on trial, not only for himself,
but also for his race, his act was in virtue of this
relation <emph>regarded (by God) as our act</emph>. God withdrew
from us as he did from him; in consequence of this
withdrawal, we begin to exist in moral darkness, destitute
of a disposition to delight in God and prone to
delight in ourselves and in the world. The sin of
Adam therefore ruined us; and the intervention of
the Son of God for our salvation is an act of pure,
sovereign, and wonderful grace.</q>
</p>

<p>
The above is extracted from a standard writer of
the Princeton Theological Seminary, and expresses
the views of the Old School Presbyterian church in
this matter.
</p>

<p>
It is simply saying that man made his own depraved
nature, inasmuch as God <emph>regarded</emph> Adam's act as our
act <emph>when it was not</emph>, being performed before we existed,
and that he punished us by withdrawing from us, as
he did from Adam, and thus our nature becomes ruined
and totally depraved.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<div>
<head>The Constitutional Transmission Mode.</head>

<p>
The next way in which man is made to be the author
of his own nature is called the <emph>constitutional transmission
mode</emph>. It is as follows:
</p>

<p>
God made Adam with a perfectly holy mind, and
then Adam sinned and ruined his own nature. <emph>In
consequence</emph> of this act, God established <emph>such a constitution
of things</emph> that Adam transmitted his depraved
nature to all his posterity, just as bodily diseases
are transmitted from parents to children.
</p>

<p>
In this way <emph>man</emph> is said to be the author of his own
depraved nature, meaning, by man, <emph>Adam</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In this case it is conceded that God had power to
make such a constitution of things as that all human
minds would begin existence, as Adam did, with perfectly
holy minds, and that instead of this, he chose
that such a depraved nature should be transmitted
to all as would insure universal sin. And yet it is
claimed that by this mode, man, and not God, is
shown to be <q>the author of sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is the mode adopted by most of the Andover
and New Haven theologians.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Edward Beecher, in his work <q>The Conflict of
Ages,</q> advocates the idea that man ruined his own
nature in a preëxistent state <emph>before</emph> Adam. But the
evidence of this has not yet been presented.
</p>

<p>
Thus all who do not take the Catholic mode of
<emph>mystery and sovereignty</emph> maintain that <emph>man made his
own depravity of nature</emph>, either <emph>in</emph> or <emph>by</emph> or <emph>before</emph>
Adam.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Condition of infants.</head>

<p>
The most difficult point of all, is the probable condition
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
of infants after death. On the Augustinian theory
they all have been ruined in nature by Adam's sin,
and when they die, go with this depraved nature to
their final state. Augustine acquired the name of
<q><foreign rend='italic'>durus pater</foreign></q> (cruel father) because he was consistent
with his theory and taught that these little ones, if
unbaptized, were doomed to endless torments.
</p>

<p>
But as humanity and common sense have gained
ground this hideous tenet has passed away, and few
are now found who do not sacrifice consistency to humanity,
and allow that in spite of their total depravity,
all infants go directly to heaven and are forever
blessed. Formerly some would confine this favor to
the <q>elect infants,</q> others to the infants of <q>elect
parents,</q> but few are found at this day who venture to
teach that God sends even one new-born being to
eternal misery for Adam's sin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The difficulties not removed but rather increased by
these methods.</head>

<p>
But the difficulties involved in the Augustine theory
do not lie in <emph>the mode</emph> by which it came to pass that all
men begin existence with depraved natures, but in <emph>the
fact</emph>, that God, having power to create all minds as
perfect as Adam's, and also the power to regenerate
all, has chosen not to do so, and thus has preferred the
consequent sin and misery to the happiness resulting
from making perfect minds.
</p>

<p>
This grand difficulty stands entirely unrelieved by
the above methods. Nay more, they all serve but to
increase a sense of the folly and enormity of the awful
result, and to present our Maker as the cruel cause of
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
all our miseries, and the fullest and most awful realization
of our idea of a perfectly malevolent being.<note place='foot'>The theory of Dr. E. Beecher, as it has not been accepted by any
denomination, is not referred to here.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Illustration of the Augustinian Theory.</head>

<p>
The following illustrates the case, though but very
imperfectly, inasmuch as any finite temporal evils are
as nothing compared to the eternal torments to which
are assigned all of our race, whose ruined nature is
not regenerated before death.
</p>

<p>
A father places a poison in the way of his wife,
forbids her to taste it, but knows she will do so and
that the consequence will be that all his children will
be born blind.
</p>

<p>
Then he places the children thus deprived of sight,
in a dreadful morass filled with savage beasts and awful
pitfalls, with a narrow and difficult path of escape,
which it is certain no one will ever find without sight.
The consequence is, that a large part of his children
sink into the pitfalls and perish.
</p>

<p>
Then he justifies himself in these ways. To some
he says, I have a right to treat my children as I please,
and I allow no one to question me on the matter. All
that I do is right and benevolent, and you must not
inquire how or why.
</p>

<p>
To all the rest he says, I am not the author of this
evil, it is <emph>the mother</emph> of the children who took the
poison when I forbade her to do so. She either made
herself blind by taking the poison, and then transmitted
the evil to her children as a hereditary boon,
or she had <q>a common nature</q> with her children and
ruined all together, or they all <q>sinned in her</q> and
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
became blind before they were born. And so I am not
<q>the author of sin</q> in this matter.
</p>

<p>
To intelligent persons not educated in the belief of
the above theory of Augustine, and of these modes of
explaining the difficulties connected with it, this account
of the matter will seem so incredible and monstrous
that they will demand evidence that the
preceding statements are true. In the next chapters
this evidence will be presented.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Augustinian Theory in Creeds.</head>

<p>
The preceding chapters have presented the Augustinian
theory of <q>the origin of evil,</q> and certain questions
connected with it which have been debated by
theologians; also the difficulties involved in the theory,
and the modes of meeting these difficulties.
</p>

<p>
The next aim will be to verify these statements by
extracts from the creeds and theologians of the great
Christian sects.
</p>

<div>
<head>Creed of the Catholic Church.</head>

<p>
It is well known that the Catholic organization preceded
that of the Protestant sects. It is also well
known that this church maintains that the decisions
of her pope and councils are <emph>infallible</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The following extracts, then, from the decisions of
the celebrated Councils of Trent at the period of the
Reformation, exhibit the theory of Augustine incorporated
as a part of the Roman Catholic creed:
</p>

<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Extract from a decree of the Council of Trent.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<q>Infants derive from Adam that original guilt which must be
expiated in the laver of regeneration in order to obtain eternal
life. Adam lost the purity and righteousness which he received
from God, not for himself only but also for us.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The catechism of the Council of Trent says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The pastor, therefore, will not omit to remind the faithful that
the guilt and punishment of original sin were not confined to
Adam, but justly descended from him, their source and cause, to
all posterity. Hence a sentence of condemnation was pronounced
<emph>against the human race</emph> immediately after the fall of Adam.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>John Calvin.</head>

<p>
The celebrated John Calvin, one of the greatest
Protestant theologians at the period of the Reformation,
wrote a complete <emph>system</emph> based on the Augustinian
theory. This system has been perpetuated in all the
various sects which from him are named <hi rend='italic'>Calvinistic</hi>.
The following extract gives his views on this subject:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>John Calvin.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It is a hereditary depravity and corruption of our nature, diffused
through all parts of the soul, which, in the first place, exposes
us to the wrath of God, and then produces in us those works
which the Scripture calls the works of the flesh.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Of infants, he says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>They bring their condemnation with them from their mother's
womb, being liable to punishment, not for the sin of another, but
for their own. For although they have not as yet produced the
fruits of their iniquity, yet they have the seed inclosed in themselves;
nay, their whole nature is, as it were, a seed of sin; therefore
they can not but be odious and abominable to God. Whence
it follows that it is properly considered sin before God, because
there could not be liability to punishment without sin.</q>
</p>

<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
<q>The corruption of nature precedes and gives rise to all sinful
acts, and is in itself deserving of punishment.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Westminster Assembly.</head>

<p>
The Westminster Assembly represented the Calvinistic
sects of Great Britain near the period of the
Reformation.
</p>

<p>
The confession of faith and catechisms prepared by
them have ever since been received as a true statement
of the system of religious doctrine, as held by
the Presbyterian, Congregational, and Calvinistic Baptist
denominations in Great Britain and America. The
following presents the Augustinian theory, as contained
in their creed:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>A <emph>corrupted nature</emph> was conveyed from our first parents to
all their posterity. From this original corruption, whereby we
are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good,
and wholly inclined to all evil, do proceed all actual transgressions.
Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of the
righteous law of God, and contrary thereunto, doth in its own nature
bring guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is bound over to the
wrath of God and curse of the law, and so made subject to death,
with all miseries, spiritual, temporal and eternal.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Episcopalians.</head>

<p>
The following from the Thirty-nine Articles of the
Church of England presents the same doctrine, as
held by the Episcopalians of Great Britain and America:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Original sin is the fault and corruption of the nature of every
man, that naturally is engendered in the offspring of Adam;
whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is
of his own nature inclined to evil&mdash;and this infection of nature
doth remain in the regenerated.</q>
</p>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<p>
<q>The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, that he
can not turn and prepare himself (by his own natural strength
and good works) to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we
have <emph>no power</emph> to do good works pleasant and acceptable to God,
without the grace of God by Christ preventing us; that we may
have a good will, and working with us when we have that good
will.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Methodists.</head>

<p>
In the Methodist Quarterly Review for July, 1857,
the editor, in speaking of the works of Arminius,
says, p. 345, <q>Our denomination, <emph>whose creed agrees so
completely with the teachings of this learned, accomplished
and holy man</emph>, is bound to maintain the freshness of
his precious memory.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Arminius.</head>

<p>
In the same article are the following extracts from
the works of Arminius, which, on so good authority,
may be received as the views of the Methodist
churches on this topic:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The will of man, with respect to true good, is not only
wounded, bruised, crooked and attenuated, but is likewise captivated,
destroyed and lost, and has <emph>no powers whatever</emph>, except
such as are excited by grace.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Adam, by sinning, corrupted himself and all his posterity, and
so made them obnoxious to God's wrath.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Infants have rejected the grace of the gospel <emph>in their parents
and forefathers</emph>, by which act they have deserved to be deserted
by God. For I would like to have proof adduced how all posterity
could <emph>sin in Adam</emph> against law, and yet infants, to whom
the gospel is offered <emph>in their parents</emph> and rejected, have not sinned
against the grace of the gospel.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>For there is a permanent principle in the covenant of God,
that children should be comprehended and adjudged in their parents.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<p>
Watson, the leading Arminian theologian, says that
in the doctrine of the corruption of our common nature
and man's natural incapacity to do good, the Arminians
and Calvinists so well agree, <q>that it is an
entire delusion to represent this doctrine, as is often
done, as exclusively Calvinistic.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Various Protestant doctrines.</head>

<p>
The following extracts from the creeds of various
European bodies of Protestant Christians show the
same doctrine. The Synod of Dort was a great council
of Protestant divines at the period of the Reformation.
It contained representatives from most of the
large bodies of Protestants in Europe. The following
gives their views on this subject:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Synod of Dort.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Therefore all men are conceived in sin and born the children
of wrath, disqualified for all saving good, propense to evil,
dead in sins, the slaves of sin; and without the grace of the regenerating
Holy Spirit, they neither are willing nor able to return to
God, to correct their depraved nature, or to dispose themselves to
the correction of it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Confession of Helvetia.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>We take sin to be that natural corruption of man derived or
spread from those our parents unto us all; through which we,
being not only drowned in evil concupiscences and clean turned
away from God, but prone to all evil, full of all wickedness, distrust,
contempt and hatred of God, can do no good of ourselves&mdash;<emph>no,
not so much as think of any</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Confession of Belgia.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>We believe that, through the disobedience of Adam, the sin
that is called original hath been spread and poured into all mankind.
Now original sin is a corruption of the whole nature,
and an hereditary evil wherewith even the very infants in their
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
mother's womb are polluted: the which also, as a most noisome
root, doth branch out most abundantly all kinds of sin in men,
and is so filthy and abominable in the sight of God, that <emph>it alone</emph> is
sufficient to the condemnation of all mankind.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Confession of Bohemia.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Original sin is naturally engendered in us and hereditary,
wherein we are all conceived and born into this world.... Let
the force of this hereditary destruction be acknowledged and
judged of by the guilt and fault involved, by our proneness and
declination to evil, by our evil nature, and by the punishment
which is laid upon it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Actual sins are the fruits of original sin, and do burst out
within, without, privily and openly, by the powers of man; that
is, by all that ever man is able to do, and by his members, transgressing
all those things which God commandeth and forbiddeth,
and also running into blindness and errors worthy to be punished
with all kinds of damnation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>French Confession (Protestant).</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Man's nature is become altogether defiled, and being blind in
spirit and corrupt in heart, hath utterly lost all his original integrity.
We believe that all the offspring of Adam are infected
with this contagion, which we call original sin, that is a stain
spreading itself by propagation. We believe that this stain is indeed
sin, because that it maketh every man (not so much as those
little ones excepted which as yet lie hid in their mother's womb)
deserving of eternal death before God. We also affirm that this
stain, even after baptism, is in nature sin.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Moravian Confession.</hi>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>This innate disease and original sin is truly sin, and condemns
under God's eternal wrath all those who are not born again
through water and the Holy Ghost.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The preceding is sufficient to establish the unanimous
agreement of Catholic and Protestant creeds and
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
confessions in maintaining the Augustinian theory of
the depraved nature of all mankind consequent on the
sin of Adam, as it has been set forth in the preceding
chapters.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Modes of Meeting Difficulties by Theologians.</head>

<p>
Having presented the Augustinian theory, as it is
set forth in both Catholic and Protestant creeds, the
next object will be to verify the statements of the
preceding chapters as to the <emph>modes of meeting difficulties</emph>
adopted by theologians.
</p>

<p>
The first extract will show that Augustine taught
that all men had a common nature in Adam, so that
his choosing to eat the forbidden fruit was the act of
each and all human minds which were existing in or
with him at that time. And thus that it was man and
not God that caused our depravity of nature.
</p>

<p>
The extract introduced to verify the above was
written to St. Jerome, who taught that all minds
commenced their first existence at or near the birth of
each. This Augustine denied, and the passage shows
not only that he taught a common nature which was
ruined in Adam, but also that all unbaptized infants
go to endless punishment for the sin thus committed
in Adam ages before they were born.
</p>

<div>
<head>Augustine's Mode.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>How can so many thousands of souls which leave the bodies of
unbaptized infants be with any equity condemned, if they were
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
newly created and introduced into these bodies for no previous
sins of their own, but by the mere will of him who created them
to animate these bodies, and foreknew that each of them, for no
fault of his own, would die unbaptized? Since, then, we can not
say that God either makes souls sinful by compulsion, or punishes
them when innocent, and yet <emph>are obliged to confess that the souls
of the little ones are condemned if they die unbaptized</emph>, I beseech you
tell me how can this opinion be defended, by which it is believed
that souls are not all derived from that one first man, but are
newly created for each particular body?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus Augustine supposed that he escaped the charge
of making God the author of sin by teaching that God
created all the souls of the race <emph>in</emph> Adam, so that
Adam's sin ruined the nature of himself and his posterity
all at one stroke, while it made it right and just
to send all unbaptized infants to eternal misery.
</p>

<p>
The next extract is introduced to verify the statement
made as to the Princeton mode of making man
the author of his own depraved nature. This mode is
the one adopted by most theologians of the Old School
Presbyterian church. It is thus set forth by Dr. Hodge,
of Princeton, in his Commentary on Romans:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Princeton Mode.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The great fact in the apostle's mind was, that God regards and
treats all men, from the first moment of their existence, as out of
fellowship with himself, as having forfeited his favor. Instead of
entering into communion with them the moment they begin to
exist (as he did with Adam), and forming them by his Spirit in
his own moral image, he regards them as out of his favor, and
withholds the influences of the Spirit. Why is this? Why does
God thus deal with the human race? Here is a form of death
which the violation of the law of Moses, the transgression of the
law of nature, the existence of innate depravity, separately or
combined, are insufficient to account for. Its infliction is antecedent
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
to them all; and yet it is of all evils the essence and the
sum. Men begin to exist out of communion with God. This is
the fact which no sophistry can get out of the Bible or the history
of the world. Paul tells us why it is. It is because we fell in
Adam; it is for the offense of one man that all thus die. The
covenant being formed with Adam, not only for himself but also
for his posterity&mdash;in other words, Adam having being placed on
trial, not for himself only, but also for his race, his act was, in virtue
of this relation, <hi rend='smallcaps'>regarded as our act</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>God withdrew from us as he did from him; in consequence
of this withdrawal, we begin to exist in moral darkness, destitute
of a disposition to delight in God, and prone to delight in ourselves
and the world. The sin of Adam, therefore, ruined us; was the
ground of the withdrawing of the divine favor from the whole race.
But such evil was inflicted before the giving of the Mosaic law;
it comes on men before the transgression of the law of nature, or
even the existence of inherent depravity. It must, therefore, be
for the offense of one man that judgment has come upon all men
to condemnation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Constitutional Transmission Mode.</head>

<p>
Dr. Dwight's system of theology is regarded as the
fairest exhibition of the theological opinions of the
majority of the New England Congregational clergy.
</p>

<p>
While the Catholic mode, as taught by Dr. Woods
so many years at Andover, is probably adopted by
many, the views of Dr. Dwight, and his successor, Dr.
Taylor, on the point under consideration, are taught
now both at the Andover and New Haven seminaries,
and probably are adopted by the great majority of
the clergy in the Congregational and New School
Presbyterian denominations.
</p>

<p>
These theologians maintain that man is the author
of his own depraved nature in this way. Adam
sinned and ruined his own nature, and then, in consequence
of this sin, God instituted <emph>such a constitution
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
of things</emph>, that this ruined nature has been transmitted
to all his posterity, after the same manner as bodily
diseases are transmitted from parent to child. This
constitution also was established when God had the
power to bestow on each human mind the same <q>holy
nature</q> which he gave to Adam. The following from
Dr. Dwight sustains this statement:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The corruption of mankind exists in consequence of the apostacy
of Adam. By means of the offense or transgression of Adam,
the judgment or sentence of God came upon all men unto condemnation,
because, and solely because <emph>all men in that state of
things which was constituted in consequence of the transgression of
Adam</emph>, became sinners.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
That is to say, God having the power to make all
men with minds as perfect as Adam's before his fall,
on account of Adam's sin <emph>constituted a state of things</emph>
that would insure the universal sinfulness of the whole
race.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Taylor, the successor of Dr. Dwight as head of
the New Haven school of divines, teaches thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Men are entirely depraved by nature. I do not mean that
their nature is in itself sinful, nor that their nature is the physical
or efficient cause of their sinning; but I mean that their nature
is the <emph>occasion or reason</emph> of their sinning&mdash;that such is their
nature, that in <emph>all</emph> the appropriate circumstances of their being they
will <emph>sin and only sin</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
He further states:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>That sin is by nature owing to propensities to inferior good,
with a difference between Adam's mind and ours (though we
can not assert that in which this difference may consist); that our
propensities are the same in kind, though different in degree, from
those of Adam; that <emph>perhaps</emph> this distinction may consist in mental
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
differences&mdash;or in superior tendencies, compared with Adam's,
to natural good, and less tendency to the highest good.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus, on account of the first sin of the first pair,
God constituted such a state of things, that instead of
perfect minds, such as God gave to the angels and
to Adam, all men receive such <q>a nature</q> as insures
<q>sin and only sin,</q> until regeneration takes place.
</p>

<p>
The next extracts will verify the statements made
as to the mode adopted by Catholic theologians.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Catholic Mode.</head>

<p>
The Catholic mode is that of <emph>mystery and sovereignty</emph>,
and is based on the assumption that the mind of man,
being utterly depraved, has no capacity to judge of
what is right and wrong.
</p>

<p>
According to this, the most abominable and horrible
crimes are to be considered virtues if God should
commit them, or should teach us that they are so.
</p>

<p>
Among the most distinguished of the Catholic theologians
is the learned Abelard, who teaches thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Would it not be deemed the summit of injustice among men,
if any one should cast an innocent son, for the sin of a father,
into those flames, even if they endured but a short time? How
much more so if eternal? Truly I confess this would be unjust in
men, because they are forbidden to avenge even their own real
injuries. But it is not so in God, who says, <q>Vengeance is mine,
I will repay;</q> and again, in another place, <q>I will kill and I will
make alive.</q> Now God commits no injustice towards his creature
in whatever way he treats him&mdash;whether he assigns him to
punishment or to life.... In whatever way God may wish
to treat his creature, he can be accused of no injustice; nor can
any thing be called evil in any way if it is done according to his
will. Nor can we in any other way distinguish good from evil,
except by noticing what is agreeable to his will.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<p>
Another celebrated Catholic theologian, <q>the good
Pascal,</q> thus disparages our natural sense of justice as
<q>wretched,</q> and of no account before this awful doctrine.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>What can be more contrary to the rules of our <emph>wretched justice</emph>
than to damn eternally an infant incapable of volition, for an
offense in which he seems to have had no share, and which was
committed six thousand years before he was born? Certainly
nothing strikes us more rudely than this doctrine; and yet without
this mystery, the most incomprehensible of all, we are incomprehensible
to ourselves.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus it is seen that Pascal concedes it as a truth that
infants are to be eternally damned for offenses in
which they <q>seem to have no share,</q> and that our
sense of justice, which revolts from it, is <q><emph>wretched</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Andover Theological Seminary was the first
one established in New England for educating ministers,
and for nearly half a century Dr. Woods filled
the leading theological chair. The following is introduced,
from the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Conflict of Ages</hi>, to verify the statement
that the Catholic mode of mystery and sovereignty
was the method adopted by him in training the clergy
of New England on this subject.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>He [Dr. Woods] expressly teaches that there is in the nature
of man, anterior to knowledge or choice, a proneness or propensity
to sin, which is in its own nature sinful, <q>the essence of moral
evil, the sum of all that is vile and hateful.</q> He also teaches that
God inflicts this <q>tremendous calamity</q> on all men for the sin of
one man. <q>This,</q> he says, <q>has been the belief of the church in
all ages.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>He then asks, <q>But how is this proceeding just to Adam's
posterity? What have they done, before they commit sin, to
merit pain and death? What have they done to merit the evil
of existing without original righteousness, and with a nature prone
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
to sin? Here,</q> he says, <q>our wisdom fails. We apply in vain to
human reason or human consciousness for an answer.</q> Nay more;
he even admits that such conduct is <q><emph>contrary to the dictates of our
fallible minds</emph>.</q> Yet he still insists that we ought not to judge at
all in the case, but to believe that it is right because God has
done it. <q>God has not made us judges. The case lies wholly out
of our province. It is a doctrine which is not to be brought for
trial to the bar of human reason. Mere natural reason, mere philosophy
or metaphysical sagacity transcends its just bounds, and
commits a heinous sacrilege, when it attacks this primary article
of our faith, and labors to distort it, to undermine it, or to expose
its truth or its importance to distrust.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The preceding serves to establish the correctness of
the writer's statements as to the modes of meeting difficulties
adopted by theologians.
</p>

<p>
In the next chapter we shall see that none of these
methods prove satisfactory even to theologians themselves.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. Theologians Themselves Concede the Augustinian
Dogmas Indefensible.</head>

<p>
Although each theologian claims that the mode of
meeting difficulties adopted by his school is satisfactory,
yet as each maintains that all other modes are
unavailing, it comes to pass that a <emph>majority</emph> of theologians
declare each attempt to make the Augustinian
dogma consistent with the moral sense of humanity an
utter failure.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the Catholic mode is not to
attempt to defend the dogma. It is <q>decreed</q> by
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
<q>the church,</q> which is the only infallible interpreter
of God's Word, to be in the Bible, and it is to be received,
like the doctrine of transubstantiation, as an
inscrutable mystery. This is the mode also adopted
by Dr. Woods and many other Protestants.
</p>

<p>
The following from the Princeton theologians presents
their protest against this Catholic method. They
perceive that if they allow it in this case, they have no
excuse for denying the validity of the Catholic defense
of transubstantiation. And so they proceed to claim
that imputing to children sins that they never committed,
and thus involving them in endless misery, is
the true mode, while the Catholic one is vain.
</p>

<div>
<head>The Princeton Mode against the Catholic Mode.</head>

<p>
The Princeton Reviewers, in opposing the Catholic
mode, as defended by Dr. Woods, say:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>How is it to be reconciled with the divine character that the
fate of unborn millions should depend on an act over which they
had not the slightest control, and in which they had no agency?
This difficulty presses the opponents of the doctrine (of imputation)
more heavily than its advocates. God must produce such
results either on the ground of <emph>justice</emph> or of <emph>sovereignty</emph>. The defenders
of imputation take the ground of <emph>justice</emph>&mdash;their opponents
that of <emph>sovereignty</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it more congenial with the unsophisticated moral feelings of
men that God, out of his <emph>mere sovereignty</emph>, should determine that
because one man sinned all men should sin, that because one man
forfeited his favor all men should incur his curse, or because one
man sinned all should be born with a contaminated moral nature,
than that, in virtue of a <emph>most benevolent constitution</emph> by which one
was made <emph>the representative</emph> of the race, the punishment of the one
should come upon all?</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
That is to say, they affirm interrogatively that imputing
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
sins to innocent beings that they never committed,
as the ground of penal inflictions, is a better
defense of God from the charge of being the author
of sin and of cruel injustice than the Catholic mode
of <emph>sovereignty and mystery</emph>. At the same time they discard
the <emph>constitutional transmission</emph> mode of Andover
and New Haven.
</p>

<p>
The following from President Edwards the younger,
gives the argument of a <emph>constitutional transmission</emph> divine
against the imputation mode.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Transmission Mode against the Imputation Mode.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The common doctrine has been, that Adam's posterity, unless
saved by Christ, are damned on account of Adam's sin, and that
this is just, because his sin is imputed or transferred to them. By
<emph>imputation his sin becomes their sin</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>When the justice of such a transfer is demanded, it is said
that <emph>the constitution which God has established</emph> makes the transfer
just.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>To this it may be replied, that the same way it may be proved
just to damn a man <emph>without any sin at all</emph>, either personal or imputed.
We need only to resolve it into <emph>a sovereign constitution</emph> of
God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The Andover and New Haven theologians regard
both the Catholic and the Princeton modes as utterly
unsatisfactory, and offer instead the mode of <emph>constitutional
transmission</emph> as relieving the difficulties.
</p>

<p>
But Dr. Woods thus argues the case against them,
and appeals powerfully to <q>intelligent and candid
men:</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Dr. Woods in behalf of the Catholic Mode against the
Constitutional Transmission Mode.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And is there not just as much reason to urge this objection
against the theory just named? Its advocates hold that God
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
brings the whole human race into existence without holiness, and
with such propensities and in such circumstances as will certainly
lead them into sin; and that he brings them into this fearful condition
in consequence of the sin of their first father, without any
fault of their own. Now, as far as the divine justice or goodness
is concerned, what great difference is there between our being
depraved at first, and being in such circumstances as will certainly
lead to depravity the moment moral action begins? Will not the
latter as infallibly bring about our destruction as the former? And
how is it more compatible with the justice or the goodness of
God to put us into one of these conditions than into the other,
when they are both equally fatal? It is said that our natural appetites
and propensities and our outward circumstances do not
lead us into sin by any absolute or physical necessity; but they
do in all cases certainly lead us into sin, and God knows that they
will when he appoints them for us. Now, how can our merciful
Father voluntarily place us, while feeble, helpless infants, in such
circumstances as he knows beforehand will be the certain occasion
of our sin and ruin?... What difference does it make, either
as to God's character, or the result of his proceedings, whether he
constitutes us sinners at first, or knowingly places us in such circumstances
that we shall certainly become sinners, and that very
soon? Must not God's design as to our being sinners be the
same in one case as in the other; and must not the final result
be the same? Is not one of these states of mankind fraught
with as many and as great evils as the other? What ground of
preference then would any man have?...</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let intelligent, candid men, who do not believe either of these
schemes, say whether one of them is not open to as many objections
as the other.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The idea of a preëxistence of the race <emph>before</emph> Adam,
is not held by any denomination.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that whenever any person claims
that each of these attempts to make the Augustine
theory, as held by the great Christian sects, consistent
with the moral sense of humanity is an utter failure,
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
he is sustained by <emph>a majority</emph> of the most learned and
acute theologians of our age and nation.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Augustinian Theory Contrary to the Moral
Sense of Mankind.</head>

<p>
Having presented evidence that both Catholics and
Protestants of Europe and America unite in holding
the Augustinian theory of the origin of evil, and also
that theologians themselves find it indefensible, the
next aim will be to present a portion of the evidence
to show that this system is at war with the moral feelings
and common sense of mankind.
</p>

<p>
There are remains of the writings of those who were
the opposers of this theory in the time of Augustine,
which show the strong emotions called forth at that
remote period by the introduction of this doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The following is from one of the theologians of that
day, addressed to the author of the theory:
</p>

<div>
<head>Julian to Augustine.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The children, you say, do not bear the blame of their own,
but of another's sins. What sort of sin can that be? What an
unfeeling wretch, cruel, forgetful of God and of righteousness, an
inhuman barbarian, is he who would make such innocent creatures
as little children bear the consequences of transgressions
which they never committed, and never could commit? God,
you answer. What god? For there are gods many and lords
many; but we worship but one God and one Lord Jesus Christ.
What God dost thou make the malefactor? Here, most holy
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
priest and most learned orator, thou fabricatest something more
mournful and frightful than the brimstone in the valley of Amsanctus.
God himself, say you, who commendeth his love towards
us, who even spared not his own Son, but hath given him
up for us all, he so determines&mdash;he is himself the persecutor of
those that are born. He himself consigns to eternal fire for an
evil will, the children who, as he knows, can have neither a good
nor an evil will.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The following is from the celebrated Dr. Watts,
whose sacred lyrics endear his name to the Christian
world:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Dr. Watts.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>This natural propagation of sinful inclinations from a common
parent, by a law of creation, seems difficult to be reconciled with
the goodness and justice of God. It seems exceeding hard to suppose
that such a righteous and holy God, the Creator, who is also
a being of such infinite goodness, should, by a powerful law and
order of creation, which is now called nature, appoint young, intelligent
creatures to come into being in such unhappy and degenerate
circumstances, liable to such intense pains and miseries,
and under such powerful tendencies and propensities to evil, by
the mere <emph>law of propagation</emph>, as should almost unavoidably expose
them to ten thousand actual sins, and all this before they have any
personal sin or guilt to deserve it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If it could be well made out that the whole race of mankind
are partakers of sinful inclinations, and evil passions, and biases
to vice, and also are exposed to many sharp actual sufferings and
to death, merely and only by the original divine law of propagation
from their parents who had sinned; and, if the justice and
goodness of God could be vindicated <emph>in making and maintaining
such a dreadful law or order of propagation</emph> through six thousand
years, we have no need of further inquiries, but might here be at
rest. But, if the scheme be so injurious to the goodness and
equity of God as it seems to be, then we are constrained to seek
a little further for a satisfactory account of this universal degeneracy
and misery of mankind.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<p>
The following was written by an American divine
at the time of the commencement of the conflict in
this country between the Old and New School Calvinists.
At that time this theory of a depraved nature
was accompanied, even in pulpit teachings, by the assumption
of man's total inability to do any thing to
gain salvation, and that Christ died, not for all men,
but only for <q>the elect.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Dr. Whelpley.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The idea that all the numerous millions of Adam's posterity
deserve the ineffable and endless torments of hell for a single act
of his, before any one of them existed, is repugnant to that reason
that God has given us, and is subversive of all possible conceptions
of justice. I hesitate not to say, that no scheme of religion ever
propagated amongst men contains a more monstrous, a more horrible
tenet. The atrocity of this doctrine is beyond comparison.
The visions of the Koran, the fictions of Sadder, the fables of the
Zendavesta, all give place to this; Rabbinical legends, Brahminical
vagaries, all vanish before it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The whole of their doctrine, then, amounts to this: that a man
is in the first place condemned, incapacitated, and eternally reprobated
for the sin of Adam; in the next place, that he is condemned
over again for not doing what he is totally and in all respects unable
to do; and in the third place that he is condemned, doubly
and trebly condemned, for not believing in a Saviour who never
died for him, and with whom he has no more to do than a fallen
angel.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The elder President Adams at first designed to enter
the clerical profession, but was deterred by doctrinal
difficulties, of which he thus writes:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>John Adams.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>If one man, or being, out of pure generosity, and without any
expectation of return, is about to confer any favor or emolument
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
upon another, he has a right and is at liberty to choose in what
manner and by what means to confer it. He may confer the favor
by his own hand or by the hand of a servant; and the obligation
to gratitude is equally strong upon the benefited being.
The <emph>mode</emph> of bestowing does not diminish the kindness, provided
the commodity or good is brought to us equally perfect and without
our expense. But, on the other hand, if one being is the
original cause of pain, sorrow, or suffering to another, voluntarily
and without provocation, it is injurious to that other, whatever
<emph>means</emph> he might employ, and whatever circumstances the conveyance
of the injury might be attended with. Thus we are equally
obliged to the Supreme Being for the information he has given us
of our duty, whether by the constitution of our minds or bodies,
or by a supernatural revelation. For an instance of the latter,
let us take original sin. Some say that Adam's sin was enough to
damn the whole human race, without any actual crimes committed
by any of them. Now this guilt is brought upon them, not by
their own rashness and indiscretion, not by their own wickedness
and vice, but by the Supreme Being. This guilt brought upon
us is a real injury and misfortune, because it renders us worse than
not to be; and therefore making us guilty on account of Adam's
delegation, or representing all of us, is not in the least diminishing
the injury and injustice, but only changing the <emph>mode</emph> of conveyance.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The celebrated Dr. Channing was educated a Calvinist.
The following exhibits his views on this subject,
after embracing Unitarianism:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Dr. Channing.</head>

<p>
He says of such views:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>They take from us our Father in heaven, and substitute a
stern and unjust Lord. Our filial love and reverence rise up
against them. We say, touch any thing but the perfections of
God. Cast no stain on that spotless purity and loveliness. We
can endure any errors but those which subvert or unsettle the
conviction of God's paternal goodness. Urge not upon us a system
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
which makes existence a curse, and wraps the universe in
gloom. If I and my beloved friends and my whole race have
come from the hands of our Creator wholly depraved, irresistibly
propense to all evil and averse to all good&mdash;if only a portion are
chosen to escape from this miserable state, and if the rest are to
be consigned, by the Being who gave us our depraved and wretched
nature, to endless torments in inextinguishable flames&mdash;then do I
think that nothing remains but to mourn in anguish of heart; then
existence is a curse, and the Creator is&mdash;&mdash;. O, my merciful
Father! I can not speak of thee in the language which this system
would suggest. No! thou hast been too kind to me to deserve
this reproach from my lips. Thou hast created me to be
happy; thou callest me to virtue and piety, because in these consists
my felicity; and thou wilt demand nothing from me but what
thou givest me ability to perform!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The following is from the pen of a celebrated writer
educated in the Baptist denomination, who finally became
a Universalist:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>John Foster.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I acknowledge my inability (I would say it reverently) to admit
this belief together with a belief in the divine goodness&mdash;the
belief that <q>God is love,</q> that his tender mercies are over all his
works. Goodness, benevolence, charity, as ascribed in supreme
perfection to him, can not mean a quality foreign to all human
conceptions of goodness. It must be something analogous in
principle to what himself has defined and required as goodness
in his moral creatures, that, in adoring the divine goodness, we
may not be worshiping an <q>unknown God.</q> But, if so, how
would all our ideas be confounded while contemplating him bringing,
of his own sovereign will, a race of creatures into existence in
such a condition that they certainly will and must&mdash;must by their
nature and circumstances&mdash;go wrong and be miserable, unless prevented
by especial grace, which is the privilege of only a small
portion of them, and at the same time affixing on their delinquency
a doom of which it is infinitely beyond the highest archangel's
faculty to apprehend a thousandth part of the horror.</q>
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
<q>It amazes me to imagine how thoughtful and benevolent men,
believing that doctrine, can endure the sight of the present world
and the history of the past. To behold successive, innumerable
crowds carried on in the mighty impulse of a depraved nature,
which they are impotent to reverse, and to which it is not the will
of God, in his sovereignty, to apply the only adequate power, the
withholding of which consigns them inevitably to their doom;
to see them passing through a short term of moral existence (absurdly
sometimes denominated a <emph>probation</emph>) under all the world's
pernicious influences, with the addition of the malign and deadly
one of the great tempter and destroyer, to confirm and augment
the inherent depravity, on their speedy passage to everlasting
woe;&mdash;I repeat, I am, without pretending to any extraordinary
depth of feeling, amazed to conceive what they contrive to do with
their sensibility, and in what manner they maintain a firm assurance
of the divine goodness and justice.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The following is the experience of the author of the
Conflict of Ages:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Dr. Edward Beecher.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If any one would know the full worth of the privilege of
living under, worshiping, loving and adoring a God of honor,
righteousness and love, let him, after years of joyful Christian experience
and soul-satisfying communion with God, at last come to
a point where his lovely character, for a time, vanishes from his
eyes, and nothing can be rationally seen but a God selfish, dishonorable,
unfeeling. No such person can ever believe that God <emph>is</emph>
such; but he may be so situated as to be unable <emph>rationally</emph> to see
him in any other light. All the common modes of defending the
doctrine of native depravity may have been examined and pronounced
insufficient, and the question may urgently press itself
upon the mind, Is not the present system a <emph>malevolent</emph> one? and
of it no defense may appear.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Who can describe the gloom of him who looks on such a
prospect? How dark to him appears the history of man! He
looks with pity on the children that pass him in the street. The
more violent manifestations of their depravity seem to be the unfoldings
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
of a corrupt nature given to them by God before any
knowledge, choice or consent of their own. Mercy now seems to
be no mercy, and he who once delighted to speak of the love of
Christ is obliged to close his lips in silence; for the original wrong
of giving man such a nature seems so great that no subsequent
acts can atone for the deed. In this state of mind, he who once
delighted to pray, kneels and rises again, because he can not sincerely
worship the only God whom he sees. His distress is not
on his own account. He feels that God has redeemed and regenerated
him; but this gives him no relief. He feels as if he could
not be bribed by the offer of all the honors of the universe to pretend
to worship or praise a God whose character he can not defend.
He feels that he should infinitely prefer once more to see
a God whom he could honorably adore, and a universe radiant
with his glory, and then to sink into non-existence, rather than to
have all the honors of the universe for ever heaped upon him by
a God whose character he could not sincerely and honestly defend.
Never before has he so deeply felt a longing after a God of a spotless
character. Never has he so deeply felt that the whole light
and joy of the universe are in him, and that when his character is
darkened all worlds are filled with gloom.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The following is from the Rev. Albert Barnes, a
leading New School Calvinistic divine, and the author
of a very popular Commentary on the Bible:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>That the immortal mind should be allowed to jeopard its infinite
welfare, and that trifles should be allowed to draw it away
from God and virtue and heaven; that any should suffer for ever&mdash;lingering
on in hopeless despair amidst infinite torments, without
the possibility of alleviation and without end; that since God
<emph>can</emph> save men and <emph>will</emph> save a part, he has not purposed to save
<emph>all</emph>; that on the supposition that the atonement is ample, and that
the blood of Christ can cleanse from all and every sin, it is not in
fact applied to all; that, in a word, a God who claims to be worthy
of the confidence of the universe, and to be a being of infinite
benevolence, should make such a world as this, full of sinners and
sufferers, and then, when an atonement has been made, he did
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
not save <emph>all</emph> the race, and put an end to sin and woe for ever;&mdash;these
and kindred difficulties meet the mind when we think on
this great subject. And they meet us whenever we endeavor to
urge our fellow-sinners to be reconciled to God. On this ground
they hesitate. These are <emph>real</emph> and not imaginary difficulties. They
are probably felt by every mind that has ever reflected on the
subject; and they are unexplained, unmitigated, unremoved.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have never known a particle of light thrown on these subjects
that has given a moment's ease to my tortured mind; nor
have I an explanation to offer, or a thought to suggest, that would
be of relief to you. I trust other men, as they profess to do&mdash;understand
this better than I do, and that they have not the anguish
of spirit which I have; but I confess, when I look on a world of
sinners and of sufferers, upon death-beds and grave-yards, upon the
world of woe filled with hosts to suffer for ever; when I see my
friends, my parents, my family, my people, my fellow-citizens;
when I look upon a whole race, all involved in this sin and danger,
and when I see the great mass of them wholly unconcerned,
and when I feel that God only can save them and yet that he does
not do it&mdash;I am struck dumb. It is all <emph>dark, dark, dark</emph> to my
soul, and I can not disguise it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This is but a brief specimen of the shuddering protest
which has arisen in all ages and from all sects,
against this stern and awful dogma, and which has
poured its most powerful records from the shivering
hearts of theologians themselves.<note place='foot'>Most of the extracts in this and the preceding chapter are furnished
by Dr. E. Beecher in his Conflict of Ages.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IX. The Principles of Common Sense Defined.</head>

<p>
The preceding extracts exhibit a portion of the evidence
to prove that the Augustinian system is contrary
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
to the moral sense of mankind, and that theologians
have failed, by their own concessions, to render it consistent
and satisfactory even to themselves.
</p>

<p>
The next attempt will be to show that <emph>the people</emph> are
endowed with <emph>principles of common sense</emph>, by the aid of
which they can educe from the <emph>works</emph> of the Creator,
independently of any revealed <emph>Word</emph>, a system of religion
far superior to the one based on the Augustinian
theory.
</p>

<p>
Our first aim will be to designate what is intended
by <q>the principles of common sense.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is claimed, then, that there are certain truths, the
belief of which exists in every rational human mind.
This belief, in some cases, as all must allow, results
from the constitution of mind given by the Creator,
and not from any instruction or knowledge gained by
other modes. Of this class is the belief of every mind
in its own existence, and also the belief in the existence
of other things beside ourselves.
</p>

<p>
There are other truths universally believed by every
rational mind, where there may be room for question
as to whether this belief is acquired or the result of
constitutional organization. But this question is waived,
as of little practical consequence for the present purpose
of this work.
</p>

<p>
The fact on which the name and classification of
these truths rests is, that the belief in them is <emph>common</emph>
to all rational minds, and is regarded as so indispensable
to true rationality, that whenever any
person shows by words and actions that a belief in
any one of these truths does not exist, he is regarded
as deranged, that is to say, his <emph>reason</emph> is said to be more
or less destroyed.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
This, therefore, is the <emph>test</emph> by which we are to distinguish
these principles of common sense from all other
knowledge. They are truths which are believed by
all rational persons, so that the disbelief of any one
of them, evinced in words and actions, is universally
regarded as proof of a deranged mind. In such cases,
a man, in common parlance, would be said to have
<q>lost his mind,</q> or to have <q>lost his reason;</q> inasmuch
as he is lacking in some of those peculiar features
which constitute man a rational being.
</p>

<p>
In this work the question is also waived as to the
number of truths which are to be included in this class.
In regard to certain of them there can be no dispute.
Of those involving any discussion, there probably will
be no occasion to speak in this work. The writer does
not claim that the common people, or that metaphysicians,
when they speak of <q>common sense,</q> always
refer to what is here designated by this term.
</p>

<p>
All that the writer claims is that there are certain
truths, the belief of which is <emph>common</emph> to all minds, either
as the result of constitutional organization or of
acquired knowledge; and that these can be classified
by this <emph>test</emph>, viz., that men universally talk and act as
if they believed them, and when they cease to do so,
are regarded as more or less insane.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it is claimed that it is proper to call them
<emph>principles of common sense</emph>, because they are that kind
of sense which is <emph>common</emph> to the whole race, and also
they are <emph>often</emph> referred to, both by metaphysicians and
by the common people, by this term.
</p>

<p>
In the following chapters it will be shown that by
the application of these principles, a system of natural
religion can be gained from the works of the Creator
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
by the same methods that men employ in all the ordinary
concerns of life, and that thus we are as fully
qualified to gain religious knowledge and peace as we
are to secure temporal comfort and prosperity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter X. Common Sense Applied to Gain the Existence
of God.</head>

<p>
Having explained what is intended by the principles
of common sense, the next attempt will be to
apply certain of these principles to gain a system of
<emph>natural religion</emph>; meaning by this term that religion
which may be gained from the <emph>works</emph> of the Creator independently
of any revealed Word.
</p>

<p>
In all systems of religion the first article relates to
the existence and character of the Deity to be worshiped
and obeyed. The first principle of common
sense to guide us in this inquiry is this:
</p>

<div>
<head>Every change has a producing cause.</head>

<p>
In the widest sense of the word, <emph>cause</emph> signifies something
as an antecedent, without which a given change
will not occur, and with which it will occur. This is
the leading idea in every use of this word.
</p>

<p>
Then there are two classes of causes; the first are
<emph>necessary</emph> or <emph>producing causes</emph>, and the second <emph>occasional
causes</emph>.
</p>

<p>
A <emph>producing cause</emph> is an antecedent which <emph>produces</emph>
a given change.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Occasional causes</emph> are those circumstances which are
indispensable to the action of producing causes.
</p>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
Thus, fire applied to powder is the producing cause
of an explosion, while the placing of the two together
is the occasional cause of it.
</p>

<p>
The idea of a producing cause is one which probably
is gained when we first discover that our own will
moves our own limbs and other things around us.
When we will to move a thing, and find the intended
change follows our volition to move it, then
we can not help believing that our own mind <emph>produced</emph>
this change. At the same time we gain the idea of
<emph>power</emph> to produce this change, and the belief also
that the thing changed had <emph>no power</emph> to refrain from
the change.
</p>

<p>
Our only mode of defining the idea of a <emph>producing
cause</emph>, of <emph>power</emph> and of <emph>want of power</emph>, is to refer to occasions
when, by willing, we cause changes, and thus
become conscious of the existence and nature of these
ideas by experience.
</p>

<p>
So also we have no mode of defining our <emph>sensations</emph>
but by stating the occasions in which we are conscious
of them. For instance, <emph>whiteness</emph> is the sensation we
have when we look at snow, and <emph>blackness</emph> is the sensation
we have when we look at charcoal.
</p>

<p>
The same idea of causation and power in ourselves
which we have when we make changes by our will,
we always connect with any thing which by experiment
and testimony we find, in given circumstances,
to be an invariable antecedent of a given change. Our
minds are so made, that whenever we find an <emph>invariable</emph>
antecedent of a given change, we can not help
believing that this antecedent <emph>produced</emph> the change, just
as we believe our own will produces changes in our
bodies and in things around us. And if any person
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
were to talk and act as if lie did not believe this, be
would be regarded as having <q>lost his reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
Moreover, whenever men, by frequent experiments,
find that a given change is <emph>invariably</emph> preceded by a
certain antecedent, they can not help believing that the
antecedent has <emph>power</emph> to produce this change, and that
the thing changed has <emph>no power</emph> to do otherwise. This
idea of <emph>power</emph> and <emph>want of power</emph> always exists whenever
men find an <emph>invariable</emph> antecedent to some change.
It is by finding what are thus invariably connected as
antecedents and consequents that men learn what are
<emph>causes</emph>, and what are <emph>effects</emph>, and what are the <emph>powers</emph> of
things around us.
</p>

<p>
Here, then, we have these as principles of common
sense believed by all men, viz.:
</p>

<p>
1. Every change (in matter or mind) has a producing
cause as an antecedent.
</p>

<p>
2. Every invariable antecedent of an invariable sequent
is a <emph>producing</emph> cause, and the thing changed has
no power to refrain from that change.
</p>

<p>
3. A producing cause, in appropriate circumstances,
has power to make a given change.
</p>

<p>
Now every man, however unlearned, can judge for
himself whether these principles of common sense exist
in his own mind, as here set forth. For example,
let any person take a magnet and discover, day after
day, that when it is placed near a piece of iron it
draws it to itself; let him find also, by testimony from
others, that this is <emph>invariable</emph> and fails in not a single
instance, and the inevitable result is a belief that the
magnet is the <emph>cause</emph> of the moving of the iron, just as
the mind is the cause of the movement of our bodies.
So also there is a belief that the magnet, in given circumstances,
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
has <emph>power</emph> to move the iron, as our will
has power to move our body. So also there is a belief
that the piece of iron, in the given circumstances,
has <emph>no power</emph> to refrain from being thus attracted.
</p>

<p>
We see, then, that it is a universal fact, that when
there is a change of any thing, or any new mode of
existence, every sane man believes there is some <emph>producing
cause</emph> of this change. Even the youngest child
exhibits this principle as a part of its mental organization.
And should a person be found who was destitute
of a belief in this truth, so that he should talk
and act as if things came into existence and were
changing places and forms without any causes, he
would be called insane, or a man who had <q>lost his
reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
Our minds being endowed with this principle, we
find the world around us to be a succession of changes
which we trace back to preceding causes, until we
come to the grand question, <q>Who, or what first
started this vast system of successive changes?</q> Only
two replies are conceivable. The first is that of the
Atheist, who, contradicting his own common sense,
maintains that, in some past period, all this vast system
of organization and changes began to exist without
any cause. The other reply is, that there is a
great, eternal, self-existent <emph>First Cause</emph>, who himself
never began to be, and who is the author of all finite
existences. This being, the Creator of the heavens
and the earth, we call God.
</p>

<p>
The next principle of common sense is that by which
we gain a knowledge of the natural attributes of the
Creator. It is this:
</p>

<p>
<emph>Design</emph> or <emph>contrivance</emph> to secure a given end, is proof
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
of an <emph>intelligent</emph> designer, and the <emph>nature</emph> of a design
proves the intention and character of its author.
</p>

<p>
The mind, as has been shown, is so formed that it
can not believe that any existence can commence without
some antecedent cause. The existence of <emph>unorganized</emph>
matter, however, would be no proof that the
cause was an <emph>intelligent mind</emph>.
</p>

<p>
But when any existence is discovered where there
is an adjustment of parts, all conducing to accomplish
some determinate end, no person can examine and understand
its nature and adaptations without the accompanying
belief that the cause of that contrivance was
a mind endowed with the capacity of adjusting means
to accomplish an end, and thus an <emph>intelligent</emph> mind.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it possible, when the object which any design
is fitted to accomplish is clearly discovered, to
doubt the <emph>intention</emph> of the designer. We can not help
believing that it was the intention of the contriver to
accomplish the end for which his contrivance is fitted.
</p>

<p>
As an example to illustrate the existence of these
principles, even in the simplest minds, if a savage
should find in the desert a gold watch, nothing could
lead him to believe that it sprang into existence there
without any cause. If he should open it and perceive
the nice adjustment of the wheels and all its beautiful
indications of contrivance, he could not believe that
the mind of an animal, or that any but an intelligent
mind constructed its machinery. If he should have
all its movements explained to him, and learn how
exactly all were fitted to mark the passage of time, it
would be equally impossible to convince him that the
contriver did not design it for such a purpose.
</p>

<p>
Very early childhood gives evidence of the existence
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
of these principles. An interesting instance of
this is recorded by a celebrated philosopher, who, to
test the existence of these principles in the mind of his
child, planted a bed with seeds arranged in the form
of the letters which spelled the child's name. When
the green symbols had sprung from the ground and
were discovered by the delighted child, the father in
vain endeavored to force his belief that the letters came
without <emph>a cause</emph> and without <emph>a design</emph>. <q>No, father.
<emph>Somebody</emph> planted them; somebody <emph>intended</emph> to have
them come up and spell my name!</q> And thus infancy
itself maintains the principles which are our
guide to the Great Source of all finite existences.
</p>

<p>
Another principle of common sense lends us still
further aid in arriving at the natural attributes of the
Creator. It is this:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Things are and will continue according to our past experience
till there is evidence of a change.</head>

<p>
All the business of life rests on a belief of this truth.
Our confidence that the sun will rise, the seasons return,
the ocean and rivers flow, the mountains remain;
and in thousands of other things that regulate our
plans and conduct, all depends on this implanted belief
that things will continue according to our past
experience till there is evidence of a change. A man
who acted as if he disbelieved this principle would be
regarded as having <q>lost his reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
When, therefore, we have gained the idea that the
Creator is an <emph>intelligent mind</emph>, we necessarily believe
that his mind is <emph>such as we have ever known in past experience</emph>,
that is, a mind <emph>like our own</emph>, endowed with
reason, intellect, susceptibilities and will. We can
not conceive of any other kind of mind, because we
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
have never had any experience or knowledge of any
other kind.
</p>

<p>
The only respect in which we can conceive of the
Creator as differing from our own minds is in the <emph>extent</emph>
of those natural faculties which are exhibited in
his works.
</p>

<p>
Thus by the use of the principles of common sense
we have gained the positions that there is a Being who
is the Author of all finite existences, whose mind is
like our own in natural faculties, while in the extent
of these faculties, as exhibited in his works, he is far
beyond our conceptions.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XI. The People's Mental Philosophy.</head>

<p>
In the preceding chapter we have applied the principles
of common sense to gain evidence of the existence
of a Creator, or Great First Cause, whose natural
attributes we can discover only by <emph>the nature</emph> of our
own minds.
</p>

<p>
This being so, our next step in seeking after God
is to examine the construction or nature of our own
minds.
</p>

<p>
The only way to discover the nature of a thing is
to examine what are its qualities, how it acts, and how
it is acted upon. This also is the same as studying the
<emph>philosophy</emph> of things. For when learned men set forth
any branch of philosophy, they only teach the qualities
of certain things, how they act, and how they are
acted upon.
</p>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<p>
Whoever, therefore, gives attention to the nature
of mind so as to discover its qualities, how it acts,
and how it is acted upon, is studying the philosophy
of mind, or mental philosophy.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>nature of mind</emph>, <emph>the philosophy of mind</emph>, and <emph>mental
philosophy</emph> are terms all expressing the same thing.
</p>

<p>
Now, the only possible way in which any person can
discover the nature of another mind is by a knowledge
of his own. We first learn by experience the qualities
of our own mind, how it acts and how it is acted
upon, and then, by a process of reasoning, we learn
that there are other minds around us, and that they
have similar qualities.
</p>

<p>
The study of mental philosophy, then, is directing
attention to the nature of our own mind, and thus discovering
the nature of other minds.
</p>

<p>
It differs from all other studies in this respect, that
all men have the materials of the knowledge sought
in their own minds, and are required simply to direct
attention to their own mental states and acts.
</p>

<p>
This being so, the common people are as fully qualified
to settle all questions in regard to the nature or
philosophy of their own minds as the most learned and
profound metaphysicians or theologians can be. All
that is requisite to success is, that they direct their attention
to the subject by suitable methods.
</p>

<p>
It will be found, on examination, that the common
people have secured a written system of mental philosophy
as real as has ever yet been furnished by any
metaphysician or theologian, while it is free from the
great defects which render many works on mental
science unpractical and repulsive.
</p>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
This&mdash;<emph>the people's system of mental philosophy</emph>&mdash;it will
be the object of what follows to set forth.
</p>

<p>
In attempting it, we shall find that mankind, in the
uses of every-day life, have arranged the various acts
and states of mind into classes and subdivisions, and
have given names to these classes, and to the specific
acts or states included in these classes. These classifications
and terms are recorded by lexicographers in
their dictionaries.
</p>

<p>
All words have that meaning which is attached to
them by the people who use them. The business of
the lexicographer is, not to settle what meaning ought
to belong to words, but rather to state the meaning
which men actually attach to them in writing and
speaking.
</p>

<p>
In setting forth the people's system of natural philosophy
as contained in lexicographies, we find that
almost every word is used to express several meanings,
similar in some respects and diverse in others.
In consequence of this, we only can attempt thus much
for mental science, as for many other subjects, viz., to
describe the thing intended, and then to select the
word most frequently used to express this idea, as set
forth in our dictionaries.
</p>

<p>
This, then, is the course pursued in the following
pages. A description is set forth of a given act or
state of mind, sufficient to identify it from all others,
and then the word is selected from dictionaries of our
language which has most frequently been used by the
common people in expressing the idea intended. Thus
every person who cares enough about the matter to
read and think, can decide as well as the most celebrated
metaphysician, whether the description given is
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
<emph>true to his own experience</emph>, and also whether, according
to lexicographers, the word selected is frequently used
by man to express this idea.
</p>

<p>
The writer, in her first attempts to investigate the
philosophy of mind, examined the works of Stewart,
Reid, Locke, Edwards, Brown, Coleridge, Cousin, Jouffroy,
Coombe, Spurtzheim and several others. More
recently some attention has been given to the writings
of Sir William Hamilton, Hickok and others. The result
has been the conviction, that most of these works
contain the people's system, more or less disguised with
diverse modes of classification and new technics, which
tend to render the whole subject misty and perplexing.
And still more unfortunately, some of them attempt the
discussion of questions which are unpractical and often
unintelligible.
</p>

<p>
As an example, certain metaphysicians have attempted
to prove that there is nothing existing but
mind, and that all which we believe to be realities
without ourselves are not so, but merely ideas in the
mind.
</p>

<p>
Other metaphysicians have attempted to meet their
arguments, and to prove that the world around us is a
reality.
</p>

<p>
Both attempts have ended in books which seem to
have no sort of <emph>practical</emph> influence either way. Men
can not help believing that there is an outer world,
and that the men and things that affect our senses are
realities, and such arguments neither lessen nor increase
this belief.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, the books written to prove or disprove
this truth are incomprehensible to most common minds,
at least the writer of this work has in vain essayed to
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
understand them, or to find any person who could
communicate any clear ideas of their contents.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XII. The Nature of Mind, or Its Powers and
Faculties.</head>

<p>
We have seen, in the preceding chapters, that our
only mode of gaining a knowledge of the natural attributes
of God, is by the study of the nature of mind.
We have seen also that the only way to discover the
nature of mind is to examine what are its qualities,
and how it acts and is acted upon in <emph>our own experience</emph>.
</p>

<p>
When we discover what our minds actually do, we
find out what they have <emph>power</emph> to do. The <emph>faculties</emph> of
mind are its <emph>powers of acting</emph> as they are exhibited in
our own experience.
</p>

<p>
The following presents a brief outline of the powers
and faculties of mind as they have been classified and
named by <emph>the people</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ideas</hi> is the word most frequently used to include <emph>all</emph>
the operations and states of mind.
</p>

<p>
Our ideas are often referred to as divided into two
classes, viz., ideas gained by the senses, and ideas that
pass through the mind without the aid of the senses.
</p>

<div>
<head>Intellectual Powers.</head>

<p>
The power to gain ideas by the five senses is called
<emph>sensation</emph> or <emph>perception</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<p>
The power to have ideas without the use of the
senses is called <emph>conception</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Per</foreign> is the Latin word for <hi rend='italic'>by</hi>, and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>con</foreign> is the word for
<hi rend='italic'>without</hi>. So we have <hi rend='italic'>per</hi>ceptions <hi rend='italic'>by</hi> the senses, and
<hi rend='italic'>con</hi>ceptions <hi rend='italic'>without</hi> the senses.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Imagination</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>fancy</hi>, is the power to make new combinations
of our conceptions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Memory</hi> is the power of recalling past ideas, and of
recognizing them as having existed before.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Judgment</hi> is the power of comparing ideas, and noticing
their relations to each other.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Abstraction</hi> is the power of noticing certain parts or
certain qualities of things, while other parts or qualities
are unnoticed.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Association</hi> is the power of recalling past ideas according
to certain modes, called <emph>laws of association</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The above powers are usually classed together, and
called <emph>the intellectual powers</emph>, or <emph>the intellect</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Susceptibilities, or Feelings.</head>

<p>
The powers of feeling various kinds of pleasure and
pain, happiness and misery, enjoyment and discomfort,
are called the <emph>susceptibilities</emph>, the <emph>emotions</emph> and the <emph>feelings</emph>.
</p>

<p>
When any thing is found to be the cause of pleasurable
feelings, there follows a desire to secure it, and it
is called <emph>good</emph>. When any thing causes pain, a desire
follows to avoid it, and it is called <emph>evil</emph>.
</p>

<p>
These <emph>desires</emph> to secure good and avoid evil are called
<emph>motives</emph> (or movers), because they <emph>move</emph> the mind to
action in order to secure the good desired or to escape
the evil feared. The objects that cause such desires
are also called motives.
</p>

<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>

<p>
For example, <emph>gold</emph> is called the motive that led a
man to murder, and the <emph>desire</emph> of gold is also called the
motive of that act.<note place='foot'>In scientific language, the <emph>object</emph> of desire is called the <emph>objective motive</emph>,
and the <emph>desire</emph> itself is called the <emph>subjective motive</emph>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Desires are measured as <emph>strong</emph> or <emph>weak</emph> by our own
consciousness. When we desire two incompatible
things and must choose one or the other, before the
act of choice we are conscious that one creates a desire
which is stronger than the other.
</p>

<p>
The only mode of deciding which desire is strongest,
is by our own consciousness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Will.</head>

<p>
The power of choosing, or willing, is called <emph>the will</emph>.
It is also called the power of <emph>volition</emph>.
</p>

<p>
When several desires coexist, some of which must
necessarily be denied in order to gratify others, we ordinarily
choose that object which excites the strongest
desire, as measured by our consciousness.
</p>

<p>
But it is often the case that we feel the strongest desire
for that which is not <emph>best</emph> for us. Thus, when sick
we have tempting fruit and nauseous medicine before
us, with power to choose either. Our intellect decides
that the medicine is best for us, but our strongest desire
is for the fruit.
</p>

<p>
In such a case we have power to choose <emph>either</emph> that
which excites the strongest desire or that which the
intellect decides to be <emph>best</emph>, even when it does not excite
the strongest desire.
</p>

<p>
This power is the chief feature of a <emph>rational</emph> mind
in distinction from an irrational mind.
</p>

<p>
And the belief that we have this power is to be
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
placed as one of the principles of common sense, because
all men talk and act as if they believe they possess
this power. And if any person were to talk and
act as if he did not believe that he had power to choose
in either of these two ways, he would be regarded as
having lost his reason.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Reason, or Common Sense.</head>

<p>
Of the thoughts which continually pass through the
mind, we find that some are attended with a feeling
of the real existence of the objects of our thoughts,
and others are not so attended. For example, we may
think of a man with a certain form carrying a dagger
and going to commit murder, and with this, a feeling
that no such thing is really existing. Again, we may
have this same idea attended with the conviction that
it is a reality.
</p>

<p>
This feeling of the <emph>reality</emph> of the objects of our
thoughts is called <emph>belief</emph>, or <emph>faith</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Our minds are so made, that we necessarily believe
not only that things <emph>are</emph> really existing at the present
time, but that things <emph>will</emph> occur that are not now in
existence. For example, we believe the sun will rise
to-morrow morning in another place nearer toward
the north or south than it did the present morning.
We believe the tide will rise higher or lower on a coming
day than it did the present day. And thus multitudes
of events are believed to be in the future.
</p>

<p>
Those things which really do or will exist, in distinction
from those we may think of but which do not
and will not exist, are called <emph>truths</emph>, or <emph>realities</emph>.
</p>

<p>
All our comfort and happiness depend on our believing
<emph>the truth</emph>, meaning by truth the <emph>reality</emph> of things.
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
To believe that things exist when they do not, or that
things are not existing when they are, involves certain
pain, disappointment and mistake.
</p>

<p>
Our great safeguard from this is that part of our
mental organization called <emph>reason</emph>, or <emph>common sense</emph>.
This, as has been shown, consists in the necessary belief
of certain truths by all men.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>test</emph> by which these truths are identified and
distinguished from all other knowledge, is the fact
that usually all men talk and act as if they believed
them, and that when they fail to do so, they are regarded
as having <q>lost their reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
The truths thus necessarily believed are the foundation
of the process called <emph>reasoning</emph>, which is a mode
of establishing other truths by the aid of those already
believed.
</p>

<p>
These principles of reason or common sense are
often called by other names, such as <emph>intuitions</emph>, <emph>intuitive
truths</emph>, <emph>first principles</emph>, etc.
</p>

<p>
Thus all the powers of mind are arranged in the
four general classes, viz., <emph>the intellect</emph>, <emph>the susceptibilities</emph>,
<emph>the will</emph>, and <emph>reason</emph> or <emph>common sense</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the power of mind called <emph>reason</emph>, what
is claimed here is, not that either the common people
or metaphysicians have usually thus clearly set
forth what is here so described and named; but that
all men, learned and unlearned, allow that there are
truths which are necessarily believed by all mankind;
that these are the foundation of all <emph>reasoning</emph>, and
that they <emph>often</emph> are called <emph>reason</emph>. So when any one
is found to lack a belief in certain of these intuitive
truths, he is said to have <q>lost his reason.</q> And
when any act or assertion is seen to contradict any
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
of these truths, it is said to be <q>contrary to reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
Therefore it is proper to put the belief in these implanted
truths as a distinct power of the mind, and to
call it <q>the reason.</q> And as the belief of these truths
is <emph>common</emph> to all men, it is also proper to call it <emph>common
sense</emph>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIII. Nature of Mind.&mdash;Regulation of the Thoughts.</head>

<p>
A system of natural religion includes not only the
existence and natural attributes of the Creator, but
his moral character and the duties owed to Him, to our
fellow-beings and to ourselves.
</p>

<p>
To discover these by the principles of common sense,
unaided by revelation, we must again turn to our own
minds as our only directory. This demands a more
enlarged consideration of many of the specific powers
and operations of mind, as developed by experience
and observation.
</p>

<div>
<head>Mode of regulating our thoughts.</head>

<p>
The mode by which the succession of our thoughts
is regulated is intimately connected with several subjects
to be discussed, and will, therefore, first receive
attention.
</p>

<p>
It will be found that our <emph>sensations</emph> and <emph>perceptions</emph>
vary in vividness and distinctness according to the
strength and permanency of certain feelings of <emph>desire</emph>
which coexist with them. For example, we are continually
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
hearing a multitude of sounds, but in respect
to many of them, as we feel no desire to know the
cause or nature of them, these sensations are so feeble
and indistinct as scarcely ever to be recalled to the
mind or recognized by any act of memory; but should
we hear some strange wailing sound, immediately the
desire would arise to ascertain its nature and cause. It
would immediately become an object of distinct and
vivid perception, and continue so as long as the desire
lasted.
</p>

<p>
While one sensation becomes thus clear and prominent,
it will be found that other sensations which were
coexisting with it will become feebler and seem to die
away. The same impressions may still be made upon
the eye as before, the same sounds that had previously
been regarded may still strike upon the ear, but while
the desire to learn the cause of that strange wailing
sound continues, the other sensations will all be faint
and indistinct. When this desire is gratified, then
other sensations resume their former distinctness and
prominency.
</p>

<p>
Our <emph>conceptions</emph>, in like manner, are affected by the
coexistence of emotion or desire. If, for example, we
are employing ourselves in study or mental speculations,
the vividness of our conceptions will vary in
exact proportion to the interest we feel in securing the
object about which our conceptions are employed.
If we feel but little interest in the subject of our
speculations, every conception connected with them
will be undefined and indistinct; but if the desire of
approbation, or the admonitions of conscience, or the
hope of securing some future good stimulate desire,
immediately our conceptions grow more vivid and
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
clear, and the object at which we aim is more readily
and speedily secured.
</p>

<p>
The mind is continually under the influence of some
desire. It constantly has some plan to accomplish,
some cause to search out, or some gratification to secure.
The present wish or desire of the mind imparts
an interest to whatever conception seems calculated to
forward this object. Thus, if the mathematician has a
problem to solve, and this is the leading desire of the
mind, among the various conceptions that arise, those
are the most interesting which are fitted to his object,
and such immediately become vivid and distinct. If
the painter or the poet is laboring to effect some new
creation of his art, and has this as the leading object
of desire, whatever conceptions seem best fitted to his
purpose are immediately invested with interest, and
become distinct and clear. If the merchant, or the
capitalist, or the statesman has some project which he
is toiling to accomplish, whatever conceptions appear
adapted to his purpose soon are glowing and defined,
in consequence of the interest with which desire thus
invests them.
</p>

<p>
From this it appears that the <emph>chief end</emph>, or leading
object of desire of the mind, will in a great measure
determine the nature and the succession of its conceptions.
If a man has chosen to find his chief happiness
in securing power and honor, then those conceptions
will be the most interesting to his mind that
best fall in with his object. If he has chosen to find
happiness in securing the various gratifications of
sense, then those conceptions that most coincide with
this desire will become prominent. If a man has
chosen to find his chief enjoyment in doing the will
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
of God, then his conceptions will, to a great extent,
be conformed to this object of desire. The current of
a man's thoughts, therefore, becomes the surest mode
of determining what is the governing purpose or leading
desire of the mind.
</p>

<p>
But there are seasons in our mental history when
the mind does not seem to be under the influence of
any governing desire; when it seems to relax, and its
thoughts appear to flow on without any regulating
principle. At such times the vividness of leading
conceptions, which otherwise is determined by <emph>desire</emph>,
seems to depend upon our past experience. Those objects
which, in past experience, have been <emph>associated
with emotion</emph>, are those which thus begin to glow in
the distinct lineaments with which emotion at first invested
them.
</p>

<p>
In past experience, all conceptions which were attended
with emotion were most distinct and clear, and
therefore, when such conceptions return united with
others, they are the ones which are most interesting,
and thus most vivid and distinct. Thus, in our musing
hours of idle reverie, as one picture after another
glides before the mind, if some object occurs, such as
the home of our youth, or the friend of our early days,
the emotions which have been so often united with
these objects in past experience cause them to appear
in clear and glowing lineaments, and the stronger have
been the past emotions connected with them, the more
clearly will they be defined. It appears, then, that
there are two circumstances that account for the apparent
<emph>selection</emph> which the mind makes in its objects of
conception. The first is the feeling that <emph>certain conceptions
are fitted to accomplish the leading desire of the
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
mind</emph>; and the second is, that <emph>certain objects in past experience
have been attended with emotion</emph>.
</p>

<p>
But there is another phenomenon in our mental
history which has a direct bearing on the nature and
succession of our conceptions. When any conception,
through the influence of desire or emotion, becomes
the prominent object, immediately other objects with
which this has been associated in past experience begin
to return and gather around it in new combinations.
Thus a new picture is presented before the
mind, from which it again selects an object according
as <emph>desire</emph> or <emph>emotion</emph> regulates, which, under this influence,
grows vivid and distinct. Around this new object
immediately begin to cluster its past associates, till
still another scene is fresh arrayed before the mind.
</p>

<p>
In these new combinations, those objects which are
least interesting continually disappear, while those most
interesting are retained to form a part of the succeeding
picture. Thus, in every mental picture, <emph>desire</emph> or
<emph>emotion</emph> seems to call forth objects which start out, as
it were, in bold relief from all others, and call from
the shade of obscurity the companions of their former
existence, which gather around them in new and varied
combinations.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is shown that the chief mode by which we
regulate the nature and succession of our thoughts is
by the <emph>choices</emph> we make of our objects of pursuit. Whatever
we choose as our <emph>chief end</emph>, or leading object of
desire, becomes the regulator of our emotions, our desires
and our thoughts. Thus we have power to control
our thoughts aright only by choosing right objects
of pursuit. We have power to regulate them in this
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
way, and but very little power to control them in any
other.
</p>

<p>
The mere determination to think only on certain
subjects in which we feel very little interest avails but
for a short time. Speedily the mind returns to its
natural course, and brings forward only those objects
connected with our chief objects of desire and pursuit.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIV. Nature of Mind.&mdash;The Moral Sense, or Moral
Susceptibilities.</head>

<p>
Those susceptibilities of pleasure and pain which
are affected by the conduct of ourselves or others, in
reference to rules of <emph>right</emph> and <emph>wrong</emph>, are called the
<emph>moral sense</emph>, or the <emph>moral susceptibilities</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In order to a more clear view of this part of the
subject, it is important to inquire as to the manner in
which the ideas of <emph>right</emph> and <emph>wrong</emph> seem to originate.
</p>

<p>
The young child first notices that certain actions of
its own are regarded with smiles and tones of love
and approval, while other acts occasion frowns and
tones of displeasure.
</p>

<p>
Next, it perceives that whatever gives pleasure to
itself is called <emph>good</emph> and <emph>right</emph>, while whatever causes
unpleasant feelings is called <emph>bad</emph> and <emph>wrong</emph>. Moreover,
it notices that there is a right and wrong way to
hold its spoon, to use its playthings, to put on its
clothes, and to do multitudes of other things. It thus
perceives, more and more, that there are <emph>rules</emph> to regulate
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
the use and action of all things, both animate and
inanimate, and that such rules always have reference
to some plan or design.
</p>

<p>
As its faculties develop and its observation enlarges,
the general impression is secured that <emph>all</emph> plans and
contrivances of men are designed to promote enjoyment
or to prevent discomfort, and are called good
and right just so far as this is done. At the same
time, all that tend to discomfort or pain are called bad
and wrong.
</p>

<p>
In all the works of nature around, too, every thing
that promotes enjoyment is called good and right, and
the opposite is called evil and wrong.
</p>

<p>
At last there is a resulting feeling that the great
design of all things is to secure good and prevent
evil, and that whatever is opposed to this is wrong,
and unfitted to the object for which all things exist.
The question whether this impression is owing solely
to observation or partly to mental constitution is
waived, as of little practical consequence.
</p>

<p>
In the experience of infancy and childhood, the <emph>law
of sacrifice</emph> is speedily developed. It is perceived that
much of the good to be gained, if sought to excess,
occasions pain, so that there must be a certain amount
of self-denial practiced, which, to the young novice,
sometimes involves disappointment and discomfort. It
is also seen that frequently two or more enjoyments
are offered which are incompatible, so that one must
be relinquished to gain the other. It is perceived, also,
that there is a constant calculation going on as to which
will be the <emph>best</emph>&mdash;that is, which will secure <emph>the most good
with the least evil</emph>. And the child is constantly instructed
that it must avoid excess, and must give up what is of
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
less value to secure the greater good. All this training
involves <emph>sacrifices</emph> which are more or less painful, so
that a young child will sometimes cry as it voluntarily
gives up one kind of pleasure as the only mode of securing
what is best.
</p>

<p>
It is perceived, also, that there is a constant <emph>balancing</emph>
of good and evil, so that a given amount of enjoyment
cancels or repays for a certain amount of evil.
When a great amount of enjoyment is purchased by
a small degree of labor or trouble, the <emph>compound result</emph>
is deemed a good, and called right; on the contrary,
when the evil involved exceeds a given amount
in comparison to the good, the compound result is
called evil and wrong.
</p>

<p>
Thus is generated the impression that there is a law
of sacrifice instituted requiring the greatest possible
good with the least possible evil, and that this is the
great design of all things.
</p>

<p>
The impression is, not merely that we are to seek
enjoyment and avoid pain, but that we are to seek the
<emph>greatest possible</emph> good with the <emph>least possible</emph> evil, and
that in doing this we are to obey the law of sacrifice,
by which the greatest good <emph>is to be bought</emph> by a certain
amount of evil <emph>voluntarily</emph> assumed.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the child is thus gradually trained to understand
that <emph>good</emph> and <emph>evil</emph> are to be regarded in two
relations. Any thing and every thing is called <emph>good</emph>
when it in any way gives enjoyment to any being.
</p>

<p>
But if the good can be secured only by sacrificing a
greater good or by inflicting a greater evil, then, in
this relation, the good is called evil and wrong. Thus,
in one relation eating a delicious fruit is a good, because
it gives enjoyment. But if such is the state of
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
a child's stomach, that sickness and suffering will follow
the act, then it is evil and wrong.
</p>

<p>
The early training of infancy introduces the first
part of the great <emph>law of sacrifice</emph> in regard to <emph>self</emph> alone.
But as the intellect develops, the existence of other
minds is learned, and their happiness or suffering become
subjects of attention. Here the calculations of
the <emph>balance</emph> of good and evil become more and more
complicated. And the <emph>two relations</emph> also become more
definite and extensive. Whatever gives pleasure is
always called <emph>good</emph> and <emph>right</emph>, until some evil is discovered
as connected with it, not alone or chiefly to
self, but to others also. Then the compound result
is sought for, and if it is seen that, <emph>on the whole</emph>, what
by itself would be good and right if dissevered from its
connected evil, does involve <emph>more</emph> evil than good, then
it is called evil and wrong. But if the balance shows
so great an amount of good as pays for certain incidental
evils, then the result is called good and right.
</p>

<p>
The child also very early learns that the <emph>character</emph>
of those around is estimated by their reference to this
mode of regarding good and evil, right and wrong.
If a child simply seeks good to itself without any
regard to the amount of evil involved as a consequence,
he is called a bad child. On the contrary, those who
make sacrifice of their wishes and plans to avoid
what would bring evil on others, are called good,
generous, lovely and virtuous. The youngest child
soon perceives that its mother and other friends are
constantly making sacrifices for its own good, and
bearing inconveniences and trouble for the good of
those around. And those who perform such acts of
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
benevolent self-sacrifice are praised, and their conduct
is called good and right.
</p>

<p>
Thus arises a conviction or belief that the design
or end for which every thing exists is to make <emph>the most</emph>
happiness possible, and that those who conform to this
design are acting right, while those who do not are
acting wrong. Eventually there is established this
conviction, also, that the <emph>voluntary sacrifice of self-enjoyment</emph>
to promote the <emph>best</emph> good of all, is the <emph>highest</emph> kind
of right action, and that those who practice this <emph>the
most</emph> are the <emph>best in character</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The first feature of our moral sense, then, is, <emph>that
impression of the great design of all things</emph> which enables
us to judge of the right and wrong in voluntary action.
This also may be placed as one of the principles of common
sense. God has so formed our minds and their circumstances,
that the result is a universal <emph>belief</emph> in every
rational mind that whatever secures the <emph>most</emph> happiness
with the least evil is <emph>right</emph>, and whatever does not is
<emph>wrong</emph>. The wanton and needless destruction of happiness
also men believe to be wrong. Their only diversities
of opinion are in regard to what will be <emph>best</emph>
and what will not.
</p>

<p>
The second feature of our moral constitution is
what is ordinarily called the <emph>sense of justice</emph>. It is that
susceptibility which is excited at the view of the conduct
of others as <emph>voluntary</emph> causes of good or evil.
</p>

<p>
In all cases where free agents act to promote happiness,
an emotion of approval arises, together with a
desire of reward to the author of the good. On the
contrary, when there is a voluntary destruction of
happiness, there is an emotion of disapproval, and a
desire for retributive pain on the author of the wrong.
</p>

<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>

<p>
These emotions are instinctive, and not at all regulated
by reason in their inception. When an evil is
done, an instant desire is felt <emph>to discover the cause</emph>; and
when it is found, an instant desire is felt <emph>to inflict some
penalty</emph>. So irrational is this impulse, that children
will exhibit anger and deal blows on inanimate objects
that cause pain. Even mature minds are sometimes
conscious of this impulse.
</p>

<p>
That this impulse is an implanted part of our constitution,
and not the result of instruction, is seen in
the delight manifested by young children in the narration
of the nursery tale where the cruel uncle who
murdered the Babes in the Wood receives the retributions
of Heaven.
</p>

<p>
It is the office of the intellect to judge whether the
deed was a voluntary one, whether the agent intended
the mischief, and whether a penalty will be of any use.
The impulse to punish is never preceded by any such
calculations.
</p>

<p>
Another feature in this sense of justice is the <emph>proportion</emph>
demanded between the evil done and the penalty
inflicted. That this also is instinctive, and not the
result of instruction, is seen in the nursery, where
children will approve of slight penalties for slight
offenses, and severe ones for great ones, but will revolt
from any very great disproportion between the
wrong act and its penalty. As a general rule, both
in the nursery and in mature minds, the greater the
wrong done, the stronger the desire for a penalty, and
the more severe the punishment demanded.
</p>

<p>
Another very important point of consideration is the
universal feeling of mankind that the <emph>natural penalties</emph>
for wrong-doing are <emph>not sufficient</emph>, and that it is an act
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
of love as well as of justice to add to these penalties.
Thus the parent who forbids his child to eat green
fruit will not trust to the results of the natural penalty,
but will restrain by the fear of the immediate
and more easily conceived penalty of chastisement.
</p>

<p>
So, in the great family of man, the natural penalties
for theft are not deemed sufficient, but severe penalties
for the protection of property are added.
</p>

<p>
This particular is the foundation of certain distinctions
that are of great importance, which will now be
pointed out.
</p>

<p>
We find the terms <q><emph>reward</emph> and <emph>punishment</emph></q> used in
two different relations. In the first and widest sense
they signify not only the penalties of human law, but
those <emph>natural consequences</emph> which, by the constitution
of nature, inevitably follow certain courses of conduct.
</p>

<p>
Thus an indolent man is said to receive poverty as
a punishment, and it is in this sense that his children
are said to be punished for the faults of their father.
</p>

<p>
The violations of natural law are punished without
any reference to the question whether the evil-doer
intended the wrong, or whether he sinned in ignorance,
or whether this ignorance was involuntary and
unavoidable. The question of the justice or injustice
of such natural penalties involves the great question
of the right and wrong of the system of the universe.
Is it just and right for the Creator to make a system
in which all free agents shall be thus led to obedience
to its laws by penalties as well as rewards, by fear as
well as by hope? This question will not be discussed
here.
</p>

<p>
Most discussions as to <emph>just</emph> rewards and penalties ordinarily
relate to the <emph>added</emph> penalties by which parents,
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
teachers and magistrates enforce obedience to natural
or to statute law.
</p>

<p>
In these questions reference is always had to the
<emph>probable results</emph> of such rewards and penalties in securing
obedience. If experience has shown that certain
penalties do secure obedience to wise and good
laws, either of nature or of human enactment, then
they are considered just. If they do not, they are
counted unwise and unjust.
</p>

<p>
So, if certain penalties are needlessly severe&mdash;that
is to say, if a less penalty will secure equal obedience,
then this also decides so severe a penalty to be unjust.
</p>

<p>
In deciding on the rectitude of the penalties of human
enactments, it is always assumed to be unjust to
punish for any lack of knowledge and obedience when
the subject had <emph>no power</emph> to know and to obey. If <emph>a
choice to obey</emph> will not secure the act required of a free
agent, then a penalty inflicted for disobedience is always
regarded as unjust. The only seeming exception
to this is the case where a person, by voluntary means,
has deprived himself of ability to obey. But in such
cases the punishment is felt to be right, not because
he does not obey when he has no power, but because
he has voluntarily deprived himself of this power.
And he is punished for destroying his ability to obey,
and not for violating the law.
</p>

<p>
These things in human laws, then, are always demanded
to make a penalty appear <emph>just</emph> to the moral
sense of mankind, namely, that the subject have power
to obey, and that he has opportunity to know the law,
and is not ignorant by any voluntary and improper
neglect.
</p>

<p>
In all questions of justice, therefore, it is important
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
to discriminate between those penalties that are inherent
as a part of the great system of the universe, and
for which the Creator alone is responsible, and those
additional penalties which result from voluntary institutions
of which men are the authors.
</p>

<p>
The next feature in our moral constitution is the
susceptibility which is excited by the intellectual judgment
of our own feelings and conduct as either right
or wrong.
</p>

<p>
In case we decide them to be right, we experience
an emotion of self-approval which is very delightful;
but if we decide that they are wrong, we experience
an immediate penalty in a painful emotion called <emph>remorse</emph>.
This emotion is always proportioned to the
amount of evil done, and the consciousness that it was
done knowingly and intentionally. No suffering is
more keen than the highest emotions of this kind,
while their pangs are often enduring and unappeasable.
Sometimes there is an attending desire to inflict retribution
on one's self as a mode of alleviating this distress.
</p>

<p>
This susceptibility is usually denominated <emph>conscience</emph>.
Sometimes this word is used to include both the intellectual
judgment of our conduct as right or wrong,
and the consequent emotions of approval or remorse;
sometimes it refers to the susceptibility alone. Either
use is correct, as in the connection in which it is employed
the distinction can ordinarily be easily made.
</p>

<p>
This analysis of our moral constitution furnishes
means for a clear definition of such terms as <emph>obligated</emph>,
<emph>ought</emph>, <emph>ought not</emph>, and the like.
</p>

<p>
A person is obligated or ought to do a thing when
he has the intellect to perceive what is <emph>best</emph>, and thus
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
<emph>right</emph>, and the moral susceptibilities just described.
When he is destitute either of the intellect or of these
susceptibilities, he ceases to be a moral and accountable
being. He can no longer be made to feel any moral
obligations.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XV. The Nature of Mind.&mdash;The Will.</head>

<p>
The power <emph>to choose</emph> exists in other animals as well
as in man, so that it is not this faculty which distinguishes
our race from the brutes. It is another part
of our nature which elevates us above the lower animals,
which will now be described.
</p>

<div>
<head>Irrational Free Agency.</head>

<p>
We have seen that desires for good are measured
as to their strength or feebleness by our own consciousness,
and that in multitudes of cases we choose
those things which excite <emph>the strongest</emph> desire. A mind
so constituted as never to be able to choose any thing
but that which excites the strongest desire, would be
entirely dependent on circumstances, and thus the
helpless sport of chance. This is the kind of free
agency which belongs to the brutes, and may properly
be called <emph>irrational free agency</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Rational Free Agency.</head>

<p>
In contrast with the above, we have already described
the mind of man as possessing the power to
choose <emph>either</emph> that which excites the strongest desire or
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
that which the intellect decides to be <emph>best for all concerned</emph>.
</p>

<p>
When there is nothing to excite desires, there is no
power at all to choose; so that motives are as indispensable
to the action of the will as physical causes
are to the movement of matter. The more strongly
desire is excited the more the power of choice is increased.
This gives rise to the universal use of language
which characterizes motives as stronger or
weaker according as desire is more or less powerful.
</p>

<p>
The greater part of our choices are for things which
are <emph>best</emph>, so that there is no conflict between what excites
the strongest desire and what is best for all. Thus
to eat, drink, walk, sleep and perform most of the
daily duties of life, are cases where the strongest desire
and what is best coincide. In all such cases we
choose that which excites the strongest desire. And
when we assign the cause or reason for our choice, we
say it was the strongest desire which was the <emph>cause</emph>;
that is to say, it was the <emph>occasional</emph> cause of our choice.
But our own mind is the only <emph>producing</emph> cause of its
own volitions.
</p>

<p>
This exhibits the grand principle of <emph>free agency</emph> in
distinction from its opposite, which is called <emph>fatalism</emph>,
viz.:
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Motives are producing causes of desire, and are occasional
causes of choice. Mind itself is the only producing
cause of choice, having power to choose either that which
excites the strongest desire or that which reason and conscience
decide to be best for all concerned.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In opposition to this, the fatalist maintains that
every act of choice follows the strongest desire, so
that there is the same <emph>invariable</emph> antecedence and sequence
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
between the two as there is in material changes
between the necessary cause and effect. This being
so, the mind has no power to choose any thing but
that which excites the strongest desire.
</p>

<p>
Now, this is a question which every person, learned
or unlearned, can decide. Have we power to choose
any other way than as we do choose? Here it is
claimed that every human being <emph>believes</emph> that we have
this power, and proves that he believes it by word and
action. And if any person were habitually to talk
and act as if he believed children and men had no
power to choose right when they choose wrong, he
would be regarded as having lost his reason.
</p>

<p>
This, therefore, is placed as one of the principles of
common sense, viz., <hi rend='italic'>every rational mind has power to
choose either that which excites the strongest desire or that
which the intellect decides to be best, even when it does not
excite the strongest desire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Moral power</emph> is the power to control rational minds
by motives.
</p>

<p>
When no desire for any good and no fear of any
evil exists, the mind has no power to choose. Excited
desires (or motives) are as indispensable to choice
as physical causes are to any change in matter.
</p>

<p>
The stronger the desire for a thing, the <emph>easier</emph> it is
to choose it; and the less desire there is for a given
thing, the <emph>harder</emph> it is to choose it. This measuring
of various degrees of power to choose, is a matter of
consciousness to every mind, and it is recognized in
all languages. And we find that all mankind, of all
languages, recognize the fact that men have power to
choose what is <emph>best</emph>, even when it conflicts with the
strongest desire; so much so, that life itself has been
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
relinquished for the good of others, when there was
little or no expectation of a future life, or of any consequent
good to self.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it will be shown in a future chapter that
our <emph>highest</emph> idea of virtue implies a conflict between
the strongest desire and the conviction of what is
right and best on the whole; so that sometimes men
choose what is seen to be wrong and yet excites the
strongest desire, and at other times what is right or
best, when it does not excite the strongest desire.
</p>

<p>
All self-control, self-denial and self-government involve
the idea of a conflict between the decisions of
reason and conscience as to what is best and right, and
the importunities of the strongest desire for what is
not so.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Subordinate and General Purposes.</head>

<p>
There is a constant succession of selections to be
made between different modes of securing happiness.
A lesser good is given up for a greater, or some good
relinquished altogether to avoid some consequent pain.
Often, also, some evil is sought as the means of securing
some future good, or of avoiding some greater
evil. Thus men endure want, fatigue and famine to
purchase wealth. Thus the nauseous draught will
be swallowed to avoid the pains of sickness; and thus
the pleasures of domestic affection will be sacrificed
to obtain honor and fame. The whole course of life
is a constant succession of such decisions between different
modes of securing happiness and of avoiding
pain.
</p>

<p>
In noticing the operation of mind, it will be seen
that there is a foundation for two classes of volitions
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
or acts of choice, which may be denominated <emph>subordinate</emph>
and <emph>general purposes</emph>.
</p>

<p>
A <emph>subordinate purpose</emph> is one that secures some particular
act, such as the moving of the arm or turning
of the head. Such volitions are ordinarily consequent
on some more general purpose of the mind, which they
aid in accomplishing, and which is, therefore, denominated
a <emph>general</emph> or <emph>generic purpose</emph>. For example, a
man chooses to make a certain journey: this is the
general purpose, and, in order to carry it out, he performs
a great variety of acts, each one of which aids
in carrying out the generic decision.
</p>

<p>
It can be seen that the general purposes may themselves
become subordinate to a still more comprehensive
purpose. Thus the man may decide to make a
journey, which is a generic choice in reference to all
acts subordinate to this end. But this journey may be
a subordinate part of a more general purpose to make
a fortune, or to secure some other important end.
</p>

<p>
It is frequently the case that a generic purpose,
which relates to objects that require a long time and
many complicated operations, exists when the mind
seems almost unconscious of its power. For example,
a man may form a generic purpose to enter a profession
for which years will be required to prepare. And
while his whole course of action is regulated by this
decision, he engages in pursuits entirely foreign to it,
and which seem to engross his whole attention. These
pursuits may sometimes be such as are antagonistic to
his grand purpose, so as at least to imperil or retard
its accomplishment. And yet this strong and quiet
purpose remains, and is eventually carried out.
</p>

<p>
It is the case, also, that a generic choice may be
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
formed to be carried out at some particular time and
place, and then the mind becomes entirely unconscious
of it till the appointed period and circumstances occur.
Then the decision becomes dominant, and controls all
other purposes. Thus a man may decide that, at a
specified hour, he will stop his studies and perform
certain gymnastic exercises. This volition is forgotten
until the hour arrives, and then it recurs and is
carried out.
</p>

<p>
This phenomenon sometimes occurs in sleep. Some
persons, in watching with the sick, will determine to
wake at given hours to administer medicines; then
they will sleep soundly till the appointed time comes,
when they will waken and perform the predetermined
actions.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the <emph>commencement</emph> of a generic purpose,
we find that sometimes it is so distinct and definite as
to be the subject of consciousness and memory. For
example, a spendthrift, in some moment of suffering
and despondency, may form a determination to commence
a systematic course of thrift and economy, and
may actually carry it out through all his future life.
Such cases are often to be found on record or in every-day
life.
</p>

<p>
In other cases, this quiet, hidden, but controlling
purpose seems to be formed by unconscious and imperceptible
influences, so that the mind can not revert
to the specific time or manner when it originated. For
example, a child who is trained from early life to
speak the truth, can never revert to any particular
moment when this generic purpose originated.
</p>

<p>
It is sometimes the case, also, that a person will contemplate
some generic purpose before it occurs, while
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
the process of its final formation seems almost beyond
the power of scrutiny. For example, a man may be
urged to relinquish one employment and engage in
another. He reflects, consults, and is entirely uncertain
how he shall decide. As time passes, he gradually
inclines toward the proposed change, until, finally,
he finds his determination fixed, he scarcely knows
when or how.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that generic purposes commence
sometimes so instantaneously and obviously that the
time and influences connected with them can be recognized.
In other cases, the decision seems to be a
gradual one, while in some instances the process can
be traced, and in others it is entirely unnoticed or forgotten.
</p>

<p>
It is in reference to such generic purposes that the
<emph>moral character</emph> of men is estimated. An honest man
is one who has a fixed purpose to act honestly in all
circumstances. A truthful man is one who has such
a purpose to speak the truth at all times.
</p>

<p>
In such cases, the degree in which such a purpose
controls all others is the measure of a man's moral
character in the estimate of society.
</p>

<p>
The history of mankind shows a great diversity of
moral character dependent on such generic choices.
Some men possess firm and reliable moral principles
in certain directions, while they are very destitute of
them in others.
</p>

<p>
Thus it will be seen that some have formed a very
decided purpose in regard to honesty in business affairs,
who yet are miserable victims to intemperance.
Others have cultivated a principle called <emph>honor</emph>, that
restrains them from certain actions regarded as mean,
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
and yet they may be frequenters of gambling saloons
and other haunts of vice.
</p>

<p>
In the religions world, too, it is the case that some
who are very firm and decided on all points of religious
observances and in the cultivation of devotional
emotions, are guilty of very mean actions, such as some
worldly men of honor would not practice at the sacrifice
of a right hand.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>On a Ruling Purpose or Chief End.</head>

<p>
The most important of all the voluntary phenomena
is the fact that, while there can be a multitude of
these quiet and hidden generic purposes in the mind,
it is also possible to form <emph>one</emph> which shall be the dominant
or controlling one, to which all the others, both
generic and specific, shall become subordinate. In
common parlance this would be called the <emph>ruling passion</emph>.
It is also called the <emph>ruling purpose</emph>, or <emph>controlling
principle</emph>. This consists in the permanent choice of
some one mode of securing happiness as the <emph>chief end</emph>
or grand object of life.
</p>

<p>
There is a great variety of sources of happiness and
of suffering to the human mind. Now in the history
of our race we find that each one of these modes of
enjoyment has been selected by different individuals
as the chief end of their existence&mdash;as the mode of
seeking enjoyment to which they sacrifice every other.
Some persons have chosen the pleasures of eating,
drinking, and the other grosser enjoyments of sense.
Others have chosen those more elevated and refined
pleasures that come indirectly from the senses in the
emotions of taste.
</p>

<p>
Others have devoted themselves to intellectual enjoyments
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
as their chief resource for happiness. Others
have selected the exercise of physical and moral power,
as in the case of conquerors and physical heroes, or
of those who have sought to control by moral power,
as rulers and statesmen.
</p>

<p>
Others have made the attainment of the esteem, admiration,
and love of their fellow-creatures, their chief
end. Others, still, have devoted themselves to the
promotion of happiness around them as their chief interest.
Others have devoted themselves to the service
of God, or what they conceived to be such, and sometimes
by the most miserable life of asceticism and self-torture.
</p>

<p>
Others have made it their main object in life to obey
the laws of rectitude and virtue.
</p>

<p>
In all these cases, the <emph>moral character</emph> of the person,
in the view of all observers, has been decided by this
dominant volition, and exactly in proportion to the
supremacy with which it has <emph>actually controlled</emph> all
other purposes.
</p>

<p>
Some minds seem to have no <emph>chief</emph> end of life. Their
existence is a succession of small purposes, each of
which has its turn in controlling the life. Others have
a strong, defined and all-controlling principle.
</p>

<p>
Now experience shows that both of these classes
are capable, the one of <emph>forming</emph> and the other of <emph>changing</emph>
such a purpose. For example, in a time of peace
and ease there is little to excite the mind strongly;
but let a crisis come, where fortune, reputation, and life
are at stake, and men and women are obliged to form
generic decisions involving all they hold dear, and
many minds that have no controlling purpose immediately
originate one, while those whose former ruling
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
aims were in one direction change them entirely to
another.
</p>

<p>
This shows how it is that days of peril create heroes,
statesmen and strong men and women. The hour of
danger calls all the energies of the soul into action.
Great purposes are formed with the strongest desire
and emotion. Instantly the whole current of thought,
and all the coexisting desires and emotions, are conformed
to these purposes.
</p>

<p>
The experience of mankind proves that a dominant
generic purpose may <emph>extend to a whole life</emph>, and actually
control all other generic and specific volitions.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>How the Thoughts, Desires and Emotions are controlled
by the Will.</head>

<p>
We will now consider some of the modes by which
the will controls the thoughts, desires and emotions.
</p>

<p>
We have seen, in previous pages, the influence which
desire and emotion exert in making both our perceptions
and conceptions more vivid. Whatever purpose
or aim in life becomes an object of strong desire, is
always distinctly and vividly conceived, while all less
interesting objects are more faint and indistinct.
</p>

<p>
We have also seen that whenever any conception
arises it always brings connected objects, forming a
new and complex picture.
</p>

<p>
Whenever the mind is under the influence of a controlling
purpose, the object of pursuit is always <emph>more
interesting</emph> than any other. This interest always fastens
on those particulars in any mental combination that
are connected with the ruling purpose and seem fitted
to promote it, making them more vivid. Around
these selected objects their past associated ideas begin
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
to cluster, forming other complex pictures. In all
these combinations, those ideas most consonant with
the leading interest of the mind become most vivid,
and the others fade away.
</p>

<p>
The grand method, then, for <emph>regulating the thoughts</emph>
is by the generic decisions of the mind as to the modes
of seeking enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the power of the mind over its own <emph>desires
and emotions</emph>, it is very clear that these sensibilities
can not be regulated by direct specific volitions.
Let any person try to produce love, fear, joy, hope or
gratitude by simply choosing to have them arise, and
it is soon perceived that no such power exists.
</p>

<p>
But there are <emph>indirect</emph> modes by which the mind can
control its susceptibilities. The first method is by directing
attention to those objects of thought which are
fitted to call forth such emotions. For example, if
we wish to awaken the emotion of fear, we can place
ourselves in circumstances of danger, or call up ideas
of horror and distress. If we wish to call forth emotions
of gratitude, we can direct attention to acts of
kindness to ourselves calculated to awaken such feelings.
If we wish to excite desire for any object, we
can direct attention to those qualities in that object
that are calculated to excite desire. In all these cases
the mind can, by an act of will, <emph>direct its attention</emph> to
subjects calculated to excite emotion and desire.
</p>

<p>
The other mode of regulating the desires and emotions
is by <emph>the direction of our generic volitions</emph>. For
example, let a man of business, who has never had
any interest in commerce, decide to invest all his property
in foreign trade. As soon as this is done, the
name of the ship that bears his all can never be heard
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
or seen but it excites some emotion. A storm, that
before would go unnoticed, awakens fear; the prices
in the commercial markets, before unheeded, now
awaken fear or afford pleasure. And thus multitudes
of varied desires and emotions are called into existence
by this one generic volition.
</p>

<p>
One result of a purpose to deny an importunate propensity
is frequently seen in the immediate or gradual
diminution of that desire. For example, if a person
is satisfied that a certain article of food is injurious
and resolves on <emph>total abstinence</emph>, it will be found that
the desire for it is very much reduced, far more so than
when the effort is to diminish the indulgence.
</p>

<p>
When a generic purpose is formed that involves
great interests, it is impossible to prevent the desires
and emotions from running consonant with this purpose.
The only mode of changing this current is to
give up this generic purpose and form another. Thus,
if a man has devoted his whole time and energies to
money-making, it is impossible for him to prevent his
thoughts and feelings from running in that direction.
He must give up this as his chief end, and take a nobler
object, if he would elevate the whole course of
his mental action.
</p>

<p>
These are the principal phenomena of the grand
mental faculty which is the controlling power of the
mind, and on the regulation of which all its other
powers are dependent.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>nature of regeneration</emph>, and the question whether
it is instantaneous or gradual or both, all are intimately
connected with the subject of this chapter.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVI. Constitutional Varieties of the Human Mind.</head>

<p>
In the preceding chapters have been presented the
most important mental faculties which are common to
the race. There are none of the powers and attributes
of the mind as yet set forth which do not belong to
every mind which is regarded as rational and complete.
</p>

<p>
But, though all the race have these in common, yet
we can not but observe an almost endless variety of
human character, resulting from the diverse <emph>proportions</emph>
and <emph>combinations</emph> of these several faculties.
</p>

<p>
These constitutional differences may be noticed, first,
in regard to the intellectual powers. Some minds are
naturally predisposed to exercise the reasoning powers.
Others, with precisely the same kind of culture,
have little relish for this, and little power of appreciating
an argument.
</p>

<p>
In other cases, the imagination seems to be the predominating
faculty. In other minds there seems to
be an equal balance of faculties, so that no particular
power predominates.
</p>

<p>
Next we see the same variety in reference to the
susceptibilities. In some minds, the desire for love
and admiration is the predominating principle. In
others, the love of power takes the lead. Some are
eminently sympathizing. Others have a strong love
of rectitude, or natural conscience. In some, the principle
of justice predominates. In others, benevolence
is the leading impulse.
</p>

<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

<p>
Finally, in regard to the power of volition, as has
been before indicated, there are some that possess a
strong will that is decisive and effective in regulating
all specific volitions, while others possess various and
humbler measures of this power.
</p>

<p>
According to the science of Phrenology, some of
these peculiarities of mind are indicated by the size
and shape of different portions of the brain, and externally
indicated on the skull.
</p>

<p>
That these differences are constitutional, and not the
result of education, is clear from the many facts showing
that no degree of care or training will serve to efface
these distinctive traits of the mind. To a certain
degree they may be modified by education, and the
equal balance of the faculties be promoted, but never
to such a degree as to efface very marked peculiarities.
</p>

<p>
In addition to the endless diversities that result
from these varied proportions and combinations, there
is a manifest variety in the grades of mind. Some
races are much lower in the scale of being every way
than others, while the same disparity exists in individuals
of the same race.
</p>

<p>
The wisdom and benevolence of this arrangement
is very manifest when viewed in reference to the interests
of a commonwealth. Where some must lead
and others follow, it is well that some have the love
of power strong, and others have it less. Where
some must be rulers, to inflict penalties as well as to
apportion rewards, it is well that there be some who
have the sense of justice as a leading principle. And
so in the developments of intellect. Some men are to
follow callings where the reasoning powers are most
needed. Others are to adopt pursuits in which taste
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
and imagination are chiefly required; and thus the
varied proportions of these faculties become serviceable.
</p>

<p>
And if it be true that the exercise of the social and
moral faculties secures the highest degree of enjoyment,
those disparities in mental powers which give
exercise to the virtues of compassion, self-denial, fortitude
and benevolence in serving the weak, and the
corresponding exercises of gratitude, reverence, humility
and devotion in those who are thus benefited,
then we can see the wisdom and benevolence of this
gradation of mental capacity.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, in a commonwealth perfectly organized,
where the happiness of the whole becomes that of each
part, whatever tends to the highest general good tends
to the best interest of each individual member. This
being so, the lowest and humblest in the scale of being,
in his appropriate place, is happier than he could
be by any other arrangement, and happier than he
could be if all were equally endowed.
</p>

<p>
This subject is very important, because some theologians
present these disparities of mental organization
as indications of the depravity consequent on Adam's
sin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVII. Nature of Mind.&mdash;Habit.</head>

<p>
This chapter is introduced because some theologians
claim that the depravity of man consists either
in <emph>a habit</emph> or in something <emph>like</emph> a habit.
</p>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<p>
Habit is a facility in performing physical or mental
operations, gained by the repetition of such acts. As
examples of this in <emph>physical</emph> operations may be mentioned
the power of walking, which is acquired only
by a multitude of experiments; the power of speech,
secured by a slow process of repeated acts of imitation;
and the power of writing, gained in the same
way. Success in every pursuit of life is attained by
oft-repeated attempts, which finally induce a habit.
</p>

<p>
As examples of the formation of <emph>intellectual</emph> habits,
may be mentioned the facility gained in acquiring
knowledge by means of repeated efforts, and the accuracy
and speed with which the process of reasoning is
performed after long practice in this art.
</p>

<p>
As examples of <emph>moral</emph> habits may be mentioned
those which are formed by the oft-repeated exercise
of self-government, justice, veracity, obedience, and
industry. The will, as has been shown, gains a facility
in controlling specific volitions and in yielding
obedience to the laws of right action by constant use,
as really as do all the other mental powers.
</p>

<p>
The happiness of man, in the present state of existence,
depends not so much upon the circumstances in
which he is placed, or the capacities with which he is
endowed, as upon the <emph>formation of his habits</emph>. A man
might have the organ of sight, and be surrounded with
all the beauties of nature, and yet, if he did not form
the habit of judging of the form, distance and size of
bodies, most of the pleasure and use from this sense
would be wanting. The world and all its beauties
would be a mere confused mass of colors.
</p>

<p>
If the habits of walking and of speech were not acquired,
these faculties and the circumstances for employing
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
them would not furnish the enjoyment they
were designed to secure.
</p>

<p>
It is also the formation of <emph>intellectual</emph> habits by mental
discipline and study, which opens vast resources
for enjoyment that otherwise would be for ever closed.
And it is by practicing obedience to parents that
<emph>moral</emph> habits of subordination are formed, which are
indispensable to our happiness as citizens, and as subjects
of government. There is no enjoyment which
can be pointed out, which is not, to a greater or less
extent, dependent upon this principle.
</p>

<p>
The influence of habit in regard to the <emph>law of sacrifice</emph>
is especially interesting. The experience of multitudes
of our race shows that such tastes and habits
may be formed in obeying this law, that what was
once difficult and painful becomes easy and pleasant.
</p>

<p>
But this ability to secure enjoyment through habits
of self-control and self-denial, induced by long practice,
so far as experience shows, could never be secured
by any other method.
</p>

<p>
That the highest kinds of happiness are to be purchased
by more or less <emph>voluntary sacrifice</emph> and <emph>suffering</emph>
to procure good for others, seems to be a part of that
nature of things which we at least may suppose has
existed from eternity. We can conceive of the eternal
First Cause only as we imagine a mind on the same
pattern as our own in constitutional capacities, but indefinitely
enlarged in extent and action. Knowledge,
wisdom, power, justice, benevolence and rectitude,
must be the same in the Creator as in ourselves, at least
so far as we can conceive; and, as the practice of self-sacrifice
and suffering for the good of others is our
highest conception of virtue, it is impossible to regard
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
the Eternal Mind as all-perfect without involving this
idea.
</p>

<p>
The formation of the habits depends chiefly upon
the leading desire or governing purpose, because whatever
the mind desires the most it will <emph>act</emph> the most to
secure, and thus by repeated acts will form its habits.
The <emph>character</emph> of every individual, therefore, as before
indicated, depends upon the mode of seeking happiness
selected by the will. Thus the ambitious man
has selected the attainment of power and admiration as
his leading purpose, and whatever modes of enjoyment
interfere with this are sacrificed. The sensual man
seeks his happiness from the various gratifications of
sense, and sacrifices other modes of enjoyment that
interfere with this. The man devoted to intellectual
pursuits, and to seeking reputation and influence
through this medium, sacrifices other modes of enjoyment
to secure this gratification. The man who has
devoted his affections and the service of his life to
God and the good of his fellow-men, sacrifices all
other enjoyments to secure that which results from the
fulfillment of such obligations. Thus a person is an
ambitious man, a sensual man, a man of literary ambition,
or a man of piety and benevolence, according
to the governing purpose or leading choice of his
mind.
</p>

<p>
There is one fact in regard to the choice of the leading
object of desire, or the governing purpose of life,
which is very important. Certain modes of enjoyment,
in consequence of repetition, increase the desire,
but lessen the capacity of happiness from this source;
while, in regard to others, gratification increases the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
desire, and at the same time increases the capacity for
enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
The enjoyments through the senses are of the first
kind. It will be found, as a matter of universal experience,
that where this has been chosen as the main
purpose of life, though the desire for such pleasures is
continually increased, yet, owing to the physical effects
of excessive indulgence, the capacity for enjoyment
is decreased. Thus the man who so degrades
his nature as to make the pleasures of eating and
drinking the great pursuit of life, while his desires
never abate, finds his zest for such enjoyments continually
decreasing, and a perpetual need for new devices
to stimulate appetite and awaken the dormant capacities.
The pleasures of sense always pall from repetition&mdash;grow
<q>stale, flat and unprofitable,</q> though the
deluded being who has thus slavishly yielded to such
appetites feels himself bound by chains of habit, which,
even when enjoyment ceases, seldom are broken.
</p>

<p>
The pleasures derived from the exercise of power,
when its attainment becomes the master passion, are
also of this description. The statesman, the politician,
the conqueror, are all seeking for this, and desire never
abates while any thing of the kind remains to be attained.
We do not find that enjoyment increases in
proportion as power is secured. On the contrary, it
seems to cloy in possession. Alexander, the conqueror
of the world, when he had gained <emph>all</emph>, wept that
objects of desire were extinct, and that possession
could not satisfy.
</p>

<p>
But there are other sources of happiness for which
the desire ever continues, and possession only increases
the capacity for enjoyment. Of this class is
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
the susceptibility of happiness from <emph>giving and receiving
affection</emph>. Here, the more there is given and received,
the more is the power of giving and receiving
increased. We find that this principle outlives every
other, and even the decays of nature itself. When
tottering age on the borders of the grave is just ready
to resign its wasted tenement, often from its dissolving
ashes the never-dying spark of affection has burst
forth with new and undiminished luster. This is that
immortal fountain of happiness always increased by
imparting, never surcharged by receiving.
</p>

<p>
Another principle, which increases both desire and
capacity by exercise, is the power of enjoyment from
being the <emph>cause of happiness to others</emph>. Never was an
instance known of regret for devotion to the happiness
of others. On the contrary, the more this holy
and delightful principle is in exercise, the more the
desires are increased, and the more are the susceptibilities
for enjoyment from this source enlarged. While
the votaries of pleasure are wearing down with the
exhaustion of abused nature, and the votaries of ambition
are sighing over its thorny wreath, the benevolent
spirit is exulting in the success of its plans of
good, and reaching forth to still purer and more perfect
bliss.
</p>

<p>
This principle is especially true in regard to the
practice of rectitude. The more the leading aim of the
mind is devoted to <emph>right feeling and action</emph>, or to obedience
to all the laws of God, the more both the desire
and the capacity of enjoyment from this source are
increased.
</p>

<p>
But there is another fact in regard to habit, which
has an immense bearing on the well-being of our race.
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
When a habit of seeking happiness in some one particular
mode is once formed, the <emph>change</emph> of this habit
becomes difficult just in proportion to the degree of
repetition which has been practiced. A habit once
formed, it is no longer an easy matter to choose between
the mode of securing happiness chosen and another
which the mind may be led to regard as much
superior. Thus, in gratifying the appetite, a man
may feel that his happiness is continually diminishing,
and that, by sacrificing this passion, he may secure
much greater enjoyment from another source; yet the
force of habit is such, that decisions of the will perpetually
yield to its power.
</p>

<p>
Thus, also, if a man has found his chief enjoyment
in that admiration and applause of men so ardently
desired, even after it has ceased to charm, and seems
like emptiness and vanity, still, when nobler objects
of pursuit are offered, the chains of habit bind him to
his wonted path. Though he looks and longs for the
one that his conscience and his intellect assure him is
brightest and best, the conflict with bad habit ends in
fatal defeat and ruin. It is true that every habit can
be corrected and changed, but nothing requires greater
firmness of purpose and energy of will; for it is not
<emph>one</emph> resolution of mind that can conquer habit: it must
be a constant series of long-continued efforts.
</p>

<p>
The influence of habit in reference to <emph>emotions</emph> deserves
special attention as having a direct influence
upon character and happiness. All pleasurable emotions
of mind, being grateful, are indulged and cherished,
and are not weakened by repetition unless they
become excessive. If the pleasures of sense are indulged
beyond a certain extent, the bodily system is
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
exhausted, and satiety is the consequence. If the love
of power and admiration is indulged to excess, so as
to become the leading purpose of life, they are found
to be cloying. But, within certain limits, all pleasurable
emotions do not seem to lessen in power by repetition.
</p>

<p>
But in regard to painful emotions the reverse is
true. The mind instinctively resists or flies from
them, so that often a habit of suppressing such emotions
is formed, until the susceptibility diminishes, and
sometimes appears almost entirely destroyed. Thus a
person often exposed to danger ceases to be troubled
by fear, because he forms a habit of suppressing it. A
person frequently in scenes of distress and suffering
learns to suppress the emotions of painful sympathy.
The surgeon is an example of the last case, where, by
repeated operations, he has learned to suppress emotions
until they seldom recur. A person inured to
guilt gradually deadens the pangs of remorse, until the
conscience becomes <q>seared as with a hot iron.</q> Thus,
also, with the emotion of shame. After a person has
been repeatedly exposed to contempt, and feels that he
is universally despised, he grows callous to any such
emotions.
</p>

<p>
The mode by which the mind succeeds in forming
such a habit seems to be by that implanted principle
which makes ideas that are most in consonance with
the leading desire of the mind become vivid and distinct,
while those that are less interesting fade away.
Now no person desires to witness pain except from the
hope of relieving it, unless it be that, in anger, the
mind is sometimes gratified with the infliction of suffering.
But, in ordinary cases, the sight of suffering
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
is avoided except where relief can be administered.
In such cases, the desire of administering relief becomes
the leading one, so that the mind is turned off
from the view of the suffering to dwell on conceptions
of modes of relief. Thus the surgeon and physician
gradually form such habits that the sight of pain and
suffering lead the mind to the conception of modes of
relief, whereas a mind not thus interested dwells on
the more painful ideas.
</p>

<p>
The habits of life are all formed either from the desire
to secure happiness or to avoid pain, and the <emph>fear
of suffering</emph> is found to be a much more powerful principle
than the <emph>desire of happiness</emph>. The soul flies from
pain with all its energies, even when it will be inert
at the sight of promised joy. As an illustration of
this, let a person be fully convinced that the gift of
two new senses would confer as great an additional
amount of enjoyment as is now secured by the eye and
ear, and the promise of this future good would not
stimulate with half the energy that would be caused
by the threat of instant and entire blindness and deafness.
</p>

<p>
If, then, the mind is stimulated to form good habits
and to avoid the formation of evil ones most powerfully
by painful emotions, when their legitimate object
is not effected they continually decrease in vividness,
and the designed benefit is lost. If a man is placed
in circumstances of danger, and fear leads to habits of
caution and carefulness, the object of exciting this
emotion is accomplished, and the diminution of it is
attended with no evil. But if fear is continually excited,
and no such habits are formed, then the susceptibility
is lessened, while the good to be secured by it
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
is lost. So, also, with emotions of sympathy. If we
witness pain and suffering, and it induces habits of
active devotion to the good of those who suffer, the
diminution of the susceptibility is a blessing and no
evil. But if we simply indulge emotions, and do not
form the habits they were intended to secure, the power
of sympathy is weakened, and the designed benefit is
lost. Thus, again, with shame: if this painful emotion
does not lead us to form habits of honor and rectitude,
it is continually weakened by repetition, and
the object for which it was bestowed is not secured.
And so with remorse: if this emotion is awakened
without leading to habits of benevolence and virtue,
it constantly decays in power, and the good it would
have secured is for ever lost.
</p>

<p>
It does not appear, however, that the power of emotion
in the soul is thus <emph>destroyed</emph>. This is evident from
the fact that the most hardened culprits, when brought
to the hour of death, where all plans of future good
cease to charm the mental eye, are often overwhelmed
with the most vivid emotions of sorrow, shame, remorse
and fear. And often, in the course of life, there
are seasons when the soul returns from its pursuit of
deluding visions to commune with itself in its own
secret chambers. At such seasons, shame, remorse
and fear take up their abode in their long-deserted
dwelling, and ply their scorpion whips till they are
obeyed, and the course of honor and virtue is resumed,
or till the distracted spirit again flies abroad for comfort
and relief.
</p>

<p>
There is a great diversity in human character, resulting
from the diverse proportions and combinations
of those powers of mind which the race have in common.
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
At the same time, there is a variety in the scale
of being, or relative grade of each mind. While all
are alike in the common faculties of the human mind,
some have every faculty on a much larger scale than
others, while some are of a very humble grade.
</p>

<p>
The principle of habit has very great influence in
modifying and changing these varieties. Thus, by
forming habits of intellectual exercise, a mind of naturally
humble proportions can be elevated considerably
above one more highly endowed by natural constitution.
So the training of some particular intellectual
faculty, which by nature is deficient, can bring it up
nearer to the level of other powers less disciplined by
exercise.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, the natural susceptibilities can be
increased, diminished or modified by habit. Certain
tastes, that had little power, can be so cultivated as to
overtop all others.
</p>

<p>
So of the moral nature: it can be so exercised that
a habit will be formed which will generate a strength
and prominency that nature did not impart.
</p>

<p>
One of the most important results of habit is its influence
on <emph>faith</emph> or <emph>belief</emph>. Those persons who practice
methods of false reasoning, who turn away from evidence
and follow their feelings in forming opinions,
eventually lose the power of sure, confiding belief.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, an honest, conscientious steadiness
in seeking the truth and in yielding to evidence, secures
the firmest and most reliable convictions, and
that peace of mind which alone results from believing
the truth.
</p>

<p>
The will itself is also subject to this same principle.
A strong will, that is trained to yield obedience to law
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
in early life, acquires an ease and facility in doing it
which belongs ordinarily to weak minds, and yet can
retain all its vigor. And a mind that is trained to
bring subordinate volitions into strict and ready obedience
to a generic purpose, acquires an ease and facility
in doing this which was not a natural endowment.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that by the principle of <emph>habit</emph> every
mind is furnished with the power of elevating itself in
the scale of being, and of so modifying and perfecting
the proportions and combinations of its constitutional
powers, that often the result is that there is no mode
of distinguishing between the effects of habit and those
of natural organization.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XVIII. The Nature of Mind Our Guide to the Natural
Attributes of God.</head>

<p>
The <emph>natural</emph> attributes of any mind are the powers
and faculties to be exercised, while it is the <emph>action</emph> or
<emph>voluntary use</emph> of these faculties that exhibits the <emph>moral</emph>
attributes.
</p>

<p>
Having gained the existence of a Great First Cause
by the use of one principle of common sense, and the
fact that this cause is an intelligent mind by another,
it has been shown that a third of these principles leads
to the belief that the natural attributes of God are like
our own. We can not conceive of any other kind of
minds than our own, because we have never had any
past experience or knowledge of any other.
</p>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<p>
But while we thus conclude that the mind of the
Creator is, so far as we can conceive, precisely like our
own in constitutional organization, we are as necessarily
led to perceive that the <emph>extent</emph> of these powers is
far beyond our own. A mind with the power, wisdom
and goodness exhibited in the very small portion
of his works submitted to our inspection, who has
inhabited eternity, and matured through everlasting
ages&mdash;our minds are lost in attempting any conception
of the <emph>extent</emph> of such infinite faculties!
</p>

<p>
Thus we are necessarily led to conceive of the Creator
as possessing the intellectual powers described in
previous pages. He perceives, conceives, imagines,
judges and remembers just as we do.
</p>

<p>
So also all our varied susceptibilities to pleasure
and pain exist in the Eternal Mind. The desire of
good and the fear of evil which are the motive power
in the human mind, exist also in the divine. Thus
by the light of nature we settle the question that the
existence of susceptibilities to pain and evil are not
the results of the Creator's will, but are a part of the
eternal nature of things which he did not originate
or control.
</p>

<p>
All the minds we ever knew or heard of are moved
to action by desire to gain happiness and escape pain,
and as we can conceive of no other kind of mind than
our own, we must attribute to the Creator this foundation
element of mental activity.
</p>

<p>
Thus we are led to attribute to the Creator all
those susceptibilities included in <emph>the moral sense</emph>, as described
in previous pages. His mind, like ours, feels
that whatever makes <emph>the most</emph> happiness with <emph>the least</emph>
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
evil is <emph>right</emph>; that is to say, <emph>it is fitted to the eternal nature
of things</emph>, of which his own mind is a part.
</p>

<p>
So also the Creator possesses that <emph>sense of justice</emph>
implanted in our own minds, which involves the desire
of good to those who make happiness, and of evil
to those who destroy happiness; and which also demands
that such retributions be <emph>proportioned</emph> to the
good and evil done, and to the <emph>power</emph> of the agent.
</p>

<p>
So also we must conceive of the Creator as possessing
the susceptibility of <emph>conscience</emph>, which includes
in the very constitution of mind retributions for right
and wrong action.
</p>

<p>
Again, we are led to conceive of God as a <emph>rational
free agent</emph>, with power to choose either that which excites
the <emph>strongest desire</emph> or that which is perceived to
be <emph>best on the whole for all concerned</emph>, even if it does not
excite the strongest desire.
</p>

<p>
Again, we are to conceive of the Creator as possessing
a belief in those principles of reason which he
has implanted in our minds, and made our guide in
all matters, both of temporal and religious concern.
</p>

<p>
Again, our experience of the nature and history
of mind, leads to the inference that no being has existed
from all eternity <emph>in solitude</emph>, but that there is <emph>more
than one eternal, uncreated mind</emph>, and that all their powers
of enjoyment from giving and receiving happiness
in social relations have been in exercise from
eternal ages. This is the just and natural deduction
of reason and experience, as truly as the deduction
that there is at least one eternal First Cause.
</p>

<p>
Again, all our experience of mind involves the idea
of the <emph>mutual relation of minds</emph>. We perceive that
minds are made to match to other minds, so that there
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
can be no complete action of mind, according to its
manifest design, except in relation to other beings.
A mind can not love till there is another mind to call
forth such emotion. A mind can not bring a tithe
of its power into appropriate action except in a community
of minds. The conception of a solitary being,
with all the social powers and sympathies of the human
mind infinitely enlarged, and yet without any sympathizing
mind to match and meet them, involves the
highest idea of unfitness and imperfection conceivable,
while it is contrary to our uniform experience of the
nature and history of mind.
</p>

<p>
It has been argued that the <emph>unity of design</emph> in the
works of nature proves that there is but one creating
mind. This is not so, for in all our experience of
the creations of finite beings no <emph>great design</emph> was ever
formed without a combination of minds, both to plan
and to execute. The majority of minds in all ages,
both heathen and Christian, have always conceived of
the Creator as <emph>in some way</emph> existing so as to involve
the ideas of plurality and of the love and communion
of one mind with another.
</p>

<p>
And yet the unity and harmony of all created
things as parts of one and the same design, teach <emph>a
degree</emph> of unity in the authorship of the universe never
known in the complex action of finite minds.
</p>

<p>
Thus a <emph>unity</emph> and <emph>plurality</emph> in the Creator of all
things is educed by reason and experience from the
works of nature.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XIX. The Nature of Mind Our Guide to the Moral
Attributes of God.</head>

<p>
Having employed the principles of common sense
to gain a knowledge of the natural attributes of God,
we are next to employ the same principles to gain his
<emph>moral</emph> character; or those attributes which are exhibited
in <emph>willing</emph>. In other words, we are to seek the
character of God as expressed in his <emph>works</emph> or <emph>deeds</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In our experience of the moral character of minds
in this world, we find that some of the highest grades
as to intellect and susceptibilities, are lowest as to
good-willing. How is it, then, with the highest mind
of all? Does he so prefer evil to good, that he deliberately
plans for the production of evil when he has
power to produce happiness in its place? Or does he
sometimes prefer evil and sometimes good, with the
variable humors of the human race? Or does he
always prefer good when it costs him no trouble or
sacrifice, but never when it does? Or is he one who
<emph>invariably</emph> chooses what is <emph>best for all</emph>, even when it
involves painful sacrifices to himself?
</p>

<p>
In seeking a reply to these momentous questions,
we return once more to the principle of common sense
before stated, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <emph>the nature of any work or contrivance
is proof of the character and design of the author</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In examining the works of the Creator, we find
that the material world impresses us as wisely adjusted
and good in construction, only as it is fitted to give
enjoyment to sentient beings. It is the intelligent,
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
feeling, acting minds that give the value to every
other existence. If there were no minds, all perception
of beauty, fitness and goodness would perish.
</p>

<p>
It is <emph>minds</emph>, therefore, which are the <emph>chief</emph> works of
the Creator's hand, and which give value to all others.
</p>

<p>
If the <emph>nature</emph> of these minds is evil, then the author
of them is proved to be evil by his works. If their
nature is good and perfect, then their author is proved
to be good and perfect.
</p>

<p>
Here again we are driven back to our own minds
to gain the only conceptions possible to us, not only
of wisdom, but of goodness or benevolence.
</p>

<p>
On examination, we shall find that we can form no
idea of these qualities which does not involve a <emph>limitation
of power</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Our idea of power is that which we gain when we
will to move our bodies or to make any other change,
and this change ensues. Our only idea of a <emph>want</emph>
of power is gained when the choice or willing of a
change or event does <emph>not</emph> produce it. Whenever,
therefore, it shall appear that the Creator wills or
wishes a thing to exist or to be changed, and that
change or existence does not follow his so willing, we
can not help believing that he has not the power to
produce it?
</p>

<p>
Again; our idea of <emph>perfectness</emph> always has reference
to power; for a thing is regarded as perfect in construction
only when there is no power in God or man
to make it <emph>better</emph>. When any arrangement is as good
as it can be, so that neither God nor man has power
to make it better, we regard it as <emph>perfect</emph>, even when
there is some degree of evil involved.
</p>

<p>
We are now prepared to define what is included in
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
the terms <emph>perfect wisdom</emph> and <emph>perfect benevolence</emph>, when
applied to the Creator or to any other being, thus: A
perfectly wise being is one who invariably wills the
best possible ends and the best possible means of accomplishing
those ends.
</p>

<p>
An imperfectly wise being is one who does not invariably
do this.
</p>

<p>
A perfectly benevolent being is one who invariably
wills the most good and the least evil <emph>in his power</emph>.
An imperfectly benevolent being is one who does not
invariably will thus.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>degree</emph> in which a being is ranked as wise and
good is estimated by the extent to which his willing
good or evil corresponds with his power.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that, in a system where evil exists,
the very idea of <emph>perfect</emph> benevolence and wisdom involves
the supposition of a <emph>limitation of power</emph>.
</p>

<p>
To return, then, to the question as proposed at the
commencement of the chapter&mdash;Is the Creator a being
who prefers good to evil invariably, or is he one who
only sometimes prefers evil to good, and at other times
prefers good to evil, with the varying humors of man;
or does he <emph>invariably</emph> choose what is <emph>best for all</emph>, even in
cases where it may cost personal sacrifice and suffering
to himself?
</p>

<p>
It will be the object of what follows to prove that
the last supposition is the true one.
</p>

<p>
In attempting this, we again take the principle of
common sense, that <q><emph>the nature</emph> of any contrivance
proves the design and character of the author.</q> Then
we proceed to a review of <emph>the nature</emph>, first of mind,
and next of the material world, to prove that the design
or <emph>chief end</emph> of the Creator is, not to make happiness
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
irrespective of the amount, but to produce the
<emph>greatest possible</emph> happiness with the <emph>least possible</emph> evil.
In other words, we are to seek for proof that God has
done all things <emph>for the best</emph>, so that he has no power to
do better.
</p>

<p>
In still another form, we are to seek for evidence, in
<emph>the nature</emph> of God's works, that he has ever done <emph>the
best he could</emph>, so that the amount of evil that ever was
or ever will exist, is not caused by his <emph>willing</emph> it, but
by his want of power to prevent it; so that any change
would be an increase of evil and a lessening of good
to the universe as a whole.
</p>

<p>
In pursuing this attempt, it will be needful to reproduce
two or three chapters of a work by the author,
already before the public, entitled, <hi rend='italic'>The Bible and
the People; or, Common Sense applied to Religion</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In this work <emph>the nature of mind</emph> is presented very
much more in detail, for the same purpose as that here
indicated. What will now follow is a brief review of
previous chapters in that work, as a <emph>summary</emph> of the
evidence there presented that the <emph>chief end</emph> of God in
all his works is to produce the greatest possible happiness
with the least possible evil.
</p>

<p>
Whenever we find any contrivances all combining
to secure a certain good result, which, at the same
time, involve some degree of inevitable evil, and then
discover that there are contrivances to diminish and
avoid this evil, we properly infer that the author intended
to secure <emph>as much of the good with as little of the
evil as possible</emph>. For example, a traveler finds a deserted
mine, and all around he discovers contrivances
for obtaining gold, and, at the same time, other contrivances
for getting rid of the earth mixed with it. The
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
inevitable inference would be that the author of these
contrivances designed to secure as much gold with as
little earth as possible; and should any one say that
he could have had more gold and less earth if he
chose to, the answer would be that there is no evidence
of this assertion, but direct evidence against it.
</p>

<p>
Again: should we discover a piece of machinery in
which every contrivance tended to secure a <emph>speed</emph> in
movement, produced by the <emph>friction</emph> of wheels against
a rough surface, and at the same time other contrivances
were found for diminishing all friction that was
useless, we should infer that the author designed to
secure the <emph>greatest possible speed</emph> with the <emph>least possible
friction</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, if we can show that mind is a contrivance
that acts by the influence of fear of evil, and
that <emph>pain</emph> seems as indispensable to the action of a free
agent as friction is to motion; if we can show that
there is no contrivance in mind or matter which is designed
to secure suffering as its primary end; if we
can, on the contrary, show that the direct end of all
the organizations of mind and matter is to produce
happiness; if we can show that it is only the <emph>wrong
action</emph> of mind that involves most of the pain yet
known, so that right action, in its place, would secure
only happiness; if we can show contrivances for diminishing
pain, and also contrivances for increasing
happiness by means of the inevitable pain involved
in the system of things, then the just conclusion will
be gained that the Author of the system of mind and
matter designed <q>to produce the greatest possible happiness
with the least possible evil.</q>
</p>

<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>

<p>
In the pages which follow, we shall present evidence
exhibiting all these particulars.
</p>

<p>
The only way in which we learn the nature of a
thing is to observe its qualities and actions. This is
true of mind as much as it is of matter. Experience
and observation teach that the nature of mind is such,
that <emph>the fear of suffering</emph> is indispensable to secure a
large portion of the enjoyment within reach of its
faculties, and that the highest modes of enjoyment can
not be secured except by sacrifice, and thus by more
or less suffering.
</p>

<p>
This appears to be an inevitable combination, as
much so as friction is inevitable in machinery.
</p>

<p>
We have the evidence of our own consciousness
that it is fear of evil to ourselves or to others that is
the <emph>strongest</emph> motive power to the mind. If we should
find that no pain resulted from burning up our own
bodies, or from drowning, or from any other cause; if
every one perceived that no care, trouble, or pain resulted
from losing all kinds of enjoyment, the effort to
seek it would be greatly diminished.
</p>

<p>
If we could desire good enough to exert ourselves
to seek it, and yet should feel no discomfort in failing;
if we could <emph>lose every thing</emph>, and feel no sense of
pain or care, the stimulus to action which experience
has shown to be most powerful and beneficent would
be lost.
</p>

<p>
We find that abundance of ease and prosperity enervates
mental power, and that mind increases in all
that is grand and noble, and also in the most elevating
happiness, by means of danger, care and pain. We
may properly infer, then, that evil is a necessary part
of the experience of a perfectly-acting mind.
</p>

<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>

<p>
So strong is the conviction that <emph>painful penalties</emph> are
indispensable, that the kindest parents and the most
benevolent rulers are the most sure to increase rather
than diminish those that are already involved in the
existing nature of things.
</p>

<p>
Again: without a revelation we have no knowledge
of any kind of mind but by inference from our experience
in this state of being. All we know of the
<emph>Eternal First Cause</emph> is by a process of reasoning, inferring
that his nature must be <emph>like</emph> the only minds of
which we have any knowledge. We assume, then,
that he is a free agent, regulated by desire for happiness
and fear of evil.
</p>

<p>
We thus come to the conclusion that this organization
of mind is a part of the <emph>fixed and eternal nature
of things</emph>, and does not result from the will of the
Creator. His own is the eternal pattern of an all-perfect
mind, and our own are formed on this perfect
model, with susceptibilities to pain as an indispensable
motive power in gaining happiness.
</p>

<p>
We will now recapitulate some of the particulars
in the laws and constitution of mind which tend to
establish the position that its Creator's grand design is
<q>to produce the greatest possible happiness with the
least possible evil.</q>
</p>

<div>
<head>Intellectual Powers.</head>

<p>
First, then, in reference to the earliest exercise of
mind in <emph>sensation</emph>. The eye might have been so made
that light would inflict pain, and the ear so that sound
would cause only discomfort. And so of all the other
senses.
</p>

<p>
But the condition of a well-formed, healthy infant
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
is a most striking illustration of the adaptation of the
senses to receive enjoyment. Who could gaze on the
countenance of such a little one, as its various senses
are called into exercise without such a conviction?
The delight manifested as the light attracts the eye,
or as pleasant sounds charm the ear, or as the limpid
nourishment gratifies its taste, or as gentle motion and
soft fondlings soothe the nerves of touch, all testify to
the benevolent design of its Maker.
</p>

<p>
Next come the pleasures of <emph>perception</emph> as the infant
gradually observes the qualities of the various
objects around, and slowly learns to distinguish its
mother and its playthings from the confused mass of
forms and colors. Then comes the gentle curiosity
as it watches the movement of its own limbs, and
finally discovers that its own volitions move its tiny
fingers, while the grand idea that <emph>it is itself a cause</emph> is
gradually introduced.
</p>

<p>
Next come the varied intellectual pleasures as the
several powers are exercised in connection with the
animate and material world around, in acquiring the
meaning of words, and in imitating the sounds and
use of language. The adult, in toiling over the dry
lexicon, little realizes the pleasure with which the little
one is daily acquiring the philosophy, grammar, and
vocabulary of its mother tongue.
</p>

<p>
A child who can not understand a single complete
sentence, or speak an intelligible phrase, will sit and
listen with long-continued delight to the simple enunciation
of words, each one of which presents a picture
to his mind of a dog, a cat, a cow, a horse, a whip, a
ride, and many other objects and scenes that have
given pleasure in the past; while the single words,
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
without any sentences, bring back, not only vivid conceptions
of these objects, but a part of the enjoyment
with which they have been connected.
</p>

<p>
Then, as years pass by, the intellect more and more
administers pleasure, while the reasoning powers are
developed, the taste cultivated, the imagination exercised,
the judgment employed, and the memory stored
with treasures for future enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
In the proper and temperate use of the intellectual
powers, there is a constant experience of placid satisfaction,
or of agreeable and often of delightful emotions,
while no one of these faculties is productive of
pain, except in violating the laws of the mental constitution.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Susceptibilities.</head>

<p>
In regard to the second general class of mental
powers&mdash;<emph>the susceptibilities</emph>&mdash;the first particular to be noticed
is the ceaseless and all-pervading <emph>desire to gain
happiness and escape pain</emph>. This is the mainspring
of all voluntary activity; for no act of volition will
take place till some good is presented to gain, or some
evil to shun. At the same time, as has been shown,
the desire to escape evil is more potent and effective
than the desire for good. Thousands of minds that
rest in passive listlessness, when there is nothing to
stimulate but hope of enjoyment, will exert every physical
and mental power to escape impending evil. The
seasons of long-continued prosperity in nations always
tend to a deterioration of intellect and manhood. It is
in seasons of danger alone that fear wakes up the highest
energies, and draws forth the heroes of the race.
</p>

<p>
Mind, then, is an existence having the power of that
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
self-originating action of <emph>choice</emph> which constitutes free
agency, while this power can only be exercised when
desires are excited to gain happiness or to escape pain.
This surely is the highest possible evidence that its
Author <emph>intended</emph> mind should thus act.
</p>

<p>
But a mind may act to secure happiness and avoid
pain to itself, and yet may gain only very low grades
of enjoyment, while much higher are within reach of
its faculties. So, also, it may act to gain happiness
for itself as the chief end in such ways as to prevent
or destroy the higher happiness of others around.
</p>

<p>
In reference to this, we find those susceptibilities
which raise man to the dignity of a rational and moral
being.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, there is that <emph>impression of the
great design</emph> of the Creator existing in every mind,
either as a result of constitution or of training, or of
both united, which results in a feeling that whatever
lessens or destroys happiness is unfit and contrary to
the system of things.
</p>

<p>
Next there is the power to balance pleasure and
pain, and estimate the compound result, both in reference
to self and to the commonwealth. With this is
combined the feeling that whatever secures <emph>the most</emph>
good with <emph>the least</emph> evil is right and fit, and that the
opposite is wrong and unfitted to the nature of things.
</p>

<p>
Next comes the <emph>sense of justice</emph>, which results in an
impulse to <emph>discover the cause</emph> of good and evil, and
when this cause is found to be a voluntary agent, a
consequent impulse to make returns of good for good,
and of evil for evil, and also to <emph>proportion</emph> retributive
rewards or penalties to the amount of good or evil done.
</p>

<p>
With this, also, is combined the feeling that those
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
retributions should be applied only where there was
<emph>voluntary</emph> power to have done otherwise. When it is
seen that there was no such power, the impulse to reward
or punish is repressed.
</p>

<p>
Such is the deep conviction that such retributions
are indispensable, that where natural pains and penalties
do not avail, others are demanded, both in the
family and in the commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, we find the susceptibility of <emph>conscience</emph>, which,
by the very framework of the mind itself, apportions
the retributive pangs of remorse for wrong doing,
and the pleasure of self-approval for well doing.
These, too, are retributions never to be escaped, and
the most exquisite, both in elevated happiness and excruciating
pain. The mind carries about in itself its
own certain and gracious remunerator&mdash;its own inexorable
prosecutor, judge, and executioner.
</p>

<p>
This same design of the Creator may be most delightfully
traced in what may be called the <emph>economy</emph> of
happiness and pain.
</p>

<p>
One particular of this is set forth at large in the
chapter on the <emph>emotions of taste</emph>.<note place='foot'>These references are to portions of the volume before mentioned
which are not introduced into this work.</note> Here we find the
mind formed not only to secure multitudinous enjoyment
through the nerves of sensation, but that, by the
principle of association, there is a perpetual <emph>reproduction</emph>
of these emotions in connection with the colors,
forms, sounds, and motions with which they were originally
associated. Thus there are perpetually returning
emotions of pleasure so recondite, so refined, so
infinite in variety and extent, and yet how little
noticed or understood!
</p>

<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>

<p>
Another indication of the same kind is the peculiarity
pointed out on former pages, where it is shown
that securing certain enjoyments which tend to promote
the <emph>general</emph> happiness increases both desire and
capacity for enjoyment, while those that terminate in
the individual diminish by possession. Thus the enjoyment
of power, which must, from its nature, be
confined to a few, diminishes by possession. Thus,
too, the pleasures of sense pall by indulgence. But
the enjoyment resulting from the exercise and reciprocation
of love, and that resulting from benevolent actions,
and that which is included in a course of perfect
obedience to all the rules of rectitude, increases
the capacity for enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
Another illustration of the same principle is exhibited
in the chapter on Habit, where it is seen that the
power of pleasurable emotions increases by repetition,
while painful emotions decrease when the good to be
secured by their agency is attained. Thus <emph>fear</emph> serves
to protect from danger till caution and habit reader it
needless, and then it decreases. And so of other painful
emotions.
</p>

<p>
It is interesting to trace the same design in the constitution
of minds in <emph>regard to each other</emph>. We find
that the purest and highest kind of happiness is dependent
on the mutual relations of minds. Thus the
enjoyment resulting from the discovery of intellectual
and moral traits in other minds&mdash;that resulting from
giving and receiving affection&mdash;that gained by sympathy,
and by being the cause of happiness to others,
and that resulting from conscious rectitude, all are dependent
on the existence of other beings.
</p>

<p>
Now we find that minds are relatively so constituted
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
that <emph>what one desires, it is a source of happiness in
another to bestow</emph>. Thus one can be pleased by the
discovery of certain traits in other minds, while, in return,
the exhibition of these traits, and the consciousness
that they are appreciated, is an equal source of
enjoyment. One mind seeks the love of others, while
these, in return, are desiring objects of affection, and
rejoice to confer the gift that is sought. The desire
of knowledge or the gratification of curiosity is another
source of pleasure, while satisfying this desire is
a cause of enjoyment to those around. How readily do
mankind seize upon every opportunity to convey interesting
news to other minds!
</p>

<p>
Again: we find that, both in sorrow and in joy,
the mind seeks for the sympathy of others, while this
grateful and soothing boon it is delightful to bestow.
So, also, the consciousness of being the cause of good
to another sends joy to the heart, while the recipient
is filled with the pleasing glow of gratitude in receiving
the benefit. The consciousness of virtue in acting for
the general good, instead of for contracted, selfish purposes,
is another source of happiness, while those who
witness its delightful results rejoice to behold and acknowledge
it. What bursts of rapturous applause
have followed the exhibition of virtuous self-sacrifice
for the good of others from bosoms who rejoiced in
this display, and who could owe this pleasure to no
other cause than the natural constitution of mind, which
is formed to be made happy both in beholding and in
exercising virtue.
</p>

<p>
This same beneficial economy is manifested in a
close analysis of all that is included in the affections
of <emph>love</emph> and <emph>gratitude</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<p>
It has been shown that, in the commencement of
existence, the young mind first learns the sources of
good and evil to self, and its sole motives are desire
for its own enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
Soon, however, it begins to experience the happiness
resulting from the relations of minds to each other,
and then is developed the superior power of <emph>love</emph>, and
its importance as a regulating principle.
</p>

<p>
In the analysis of this affection, it is seen to consist,
first, in the pleasurable emotions which arise in view
of certain traits of character in another mind. When
these qualities are discovered, the first result is emotions
of pleasure in the contemplation. Immediately
there follows <emph>a desire of good</emph> to the cause of this pleasure.
Next follows the desire of reciprocated affection&mdash;that
is, a desire is awakened to become the cause of
the same pleasure to another; for the desire of being
loved is the desire to be the cause of pleasurable emotions
in another mind, in view of our own good qualities.
When we secure this desired appreciation, then
follows an increased desire of good to the one who
bestows it.
</p>

<p>
Thus the affection of love is a combination of the
action and reaction of pleasurable emotions, all tending
to awaken the desire of good to another. This passion
may become so intensified that it will become
more delightful to secure enjoyments to another than
to procure them for self.
</p>

<p>
In what is thus far presented, we find that the desire
of good to another results solely from the fact that
certain mental qualities are <emph>causes of pleasure to self</emph>.
Of course, this desire ceases when those qualities cease
to exist or cease to be appreciated. This kind of love
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
is the natural result of the constitution of minds in
their relations to each other, making it <emph>easy and pleasant</emph>
to live for the good of another in return for the
pleasure received from their agreeable qualities and
manifestations.
</p>

<p>
But the highest element of love consists in the <emph>desire
and purpose of good to another without reference to any
good received in return</emph>. It is <emph>good willing</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The desire of good to others exists as a natural impulse
more or less powerful in differently constituted
minds. It is the cause of that pleasure which is felt
in the consciousness of being the cause of good to another.
But this natural impulse can be so developed
and increased by voluntary culture as to become the
strongest impulse of the mind, and thus the source of
the highest and most satisfying enjoyments. In many
minds this becomes so strongly developed that securing
happiness to others is sought with far more earnestness
and pleasure than any modes of enjoyment that terminate
solely in self.
</p>

<p>
This analysis lays the foundation for the distinction
expressed by the terms <emph>impulsive benevolence</emph> and <emph>voluntary
benevolence</emph>, or the <emph>love of complacency</emph> and the <emph>love
of benevolence</emph>. The first is the involuntary result of
good conferred on <emph>self</emph>; the last is a voluntary act. It
is good willing toward others without reference to self.
The first can only exist where certain qualities are
perceived and appreciated in another mind. The second
can result from voluntary effort, and become the
subject of law and penalties.
</p>

<p>
We can never be justly required to love another
mind with the love of complacency except when qualities
are perceived that, by the constitution of mind,
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
necessarily call forth such regard. But the love of
benevolence can be justly demanded from every mind
toward every being capable of happiness.
</p>

<p>
Here it is important to discriminate more exactly in
regard to the principle of <emph>benevolence</emph> and the principle
of <emph>rectitude</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It is seen that the benevolence which is the subject
of rewards and penalties as a voluntary act consists in
<emph>good willing</emph>&mdash;that is, in choosing the happiness of <emph>other</emph>
minds as well as our own as the object of interest and
pursuit.
</p>

<p>
But the principle of rectitude is more comprehensive
in its nature. It relates to obedience to <emph>all</emph> the laws
of the system of the universe&mdash;those relating to ourselves
as much as those relating to others. It is true
that, as obedience to these laws includes the greatest
possible amount of good with the least possible evil,
both to the individual and the commonwealth, the
tendency of the two principles is to the same result.
But benevolence may be exercised without any regard
to the rules of right and wrong. Instead of striving
to make the <emph>most possible</emph> happiness with the least
possible evil, as our Maker's great design demands, a
course may be taken that makes some happiness to
some minds at the expense of vast suffering and wrong
to others. No mind acts right, even in willing happiness
to others, when it is done in disregard of those
laws which demand that we should make happiness
the right way, that is, the way which is <emph>best for all</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In the physical and mental constitution of man
there is not a single arrangement the direct object of
which is to produce suffering. The susceptibilities to
pain seem designed to protect and preserve, while the
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
greater the need the more strong is this protection.
For example, in regard to physical organization, fire
is an element that is indispensable to the life, comfort,
and activity of man, and it must be accessible at all
times and places. But all its service arises from its
power to dissolve and destroy the body itself, as well
as all things around it. Therefore the pain connected
with contact with fire is more acute than almost any
other. Thus even the youngest child is taught the
care and caution needful to protect its body from injury
or destruction.
</p>

<p>
Another fact in regard to the susceptibilities of pain
is their frequent <emph>co-existence</emph> with the highest degrees
of enjoyment. The experiences of this life often present
cases where the most elevated and ecstatic happiness
is combined with the keenest suffering, while such
is the nature of the case that the suffering is the chief
cause of the happiness thus secured. The highest
illustration of this is in the suffering of saints and
martyrs, when they <q>rejoice to be counted worthy to
suffer shame,</q> or when, amid torturing flames, they
sing songs of transport and praise.
</p>

<p>
Even in common life it is constantly found that a
certain relative amount of happiness is felt to be more
than a recompense for a given amount of pain. This
relative amount may be such that the evil involved,
though great, may count as nothing. Where there is
a passionate attachment, for example, the lover exults
in the labor and suffering that will joyfully be received
as a proof of affection and will secure the compensating
return.
</p>

<p>
It is a very common fact that painful emotions <emph>are
sought</emph>, not for themselves, but as ministers to a kind
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
of mental excitement which is desired. This is the
foundation of the pleasure which is felt in tragic representations,
and in poetry and novels that present
scenes of distress. The little child will again and
again ask for the tale of the Babes in the Wood,
though each rehearsal brings forth tears; and the mature
matron or sage will spend hours over tales that
harrow the feelings and call forth sighs. This also is
the foundation of that kind of music called the <emph>minor
key</emph>, in which certain sounds bring emotions of sadness
or sorrow.
</p>

<p>
Another striking fact in regard to the desire for pain
is the emotions that are felt by the most noble and
benevolent minds at the sight of cruelty and injustice.
At such scenes, the desire for inflicting pain on the
guilty offender amounts to a passion which nothing
can allay but retributive justice. And the more benevolent
the mind, the stronger this desire for retributive
evil to another.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that the mind is so made as to desire
pain both for itself and for others; not in itself
considered, but as the indispensable means to gain
some consequent enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>highest kinds</emph> of happiness result from painful
emergencies. The transports of love, gratitude, and
delight, when some benefactor rescues suffering thousands
from danger and evil, could exist in no other
way. All the long train of virtues included in patient
toil for the good of others, in heroic daring, in brave
adventure, in fortitude, in patience, in resignation, in
heavenly meekness, in noble magnanimity, in sublime
self-sacrifice, all involve the idea of trial, danger, and
suffering. It is only the highest and noblest class of
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
minds that can fully understand that the most blissful
of all enjoyments are those which are bought with
pain.
</p>

<p>
But the most cheering feature in the constitution of
mind is all that is included in the principle of <emph>habit</emph>.
We see in the commencement of existence that every
action of mind and body is imperfect, and more or less
difficult, while each effort to secure right action increases
the facility of so doing. We see that, owing
to this principle, every act of obedience to law makes
such a course easier. The intellect, the susceptibilities,
the will, all come under this benign influence.
Habit may so diminish the difficulty of self-denial for
our own good that the pain entirely ceases; and self-sacrifice
for the good of others may so develop benevolence
and generate a habit that it will become pleasure
without pain. There are those even in this world,
who have so attained this capacity of living in the life
of those around them, that the happiness of others
becomes their own, so that there is even less pain in
self-denial for the good of others than for that of self.
When this habit of mind is attained by all, the happiness
of the commonwealth will become the portion of
each individual, and thus be multiplied to an inconceivable
extent.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XX. Additional Proof of the Moral Attributes of
God.</head>

<p>
We have presented the <q>nature</q> of mind as the
chief evidence of the grand design of its Creator in
forming all things, and thus also presented the proof
of his perfect wisdom, benevolence, and rectitude.
We now will trace the evidences of the same beneficent
design in the nature of all social and material
organizations.
</p>

<p>
First, then, in regard to the domestic relations. We
have seen that while all happiness depends on obedience
to laws, every mind comes into existence in perfect
ignorance of them, and without any power to learn
what is good or evil but by experience and instruction.
The intention of the Creator that each new-born being
should be taught these laws and trained to obey them,
is clearly seen in the first and highest domestic relation.
In this we see two mature minds, who have
themselves been trained to understand these laws,
drawn by sweet and gentle influences to each other.
They go apart from all past ties of kindred; they have
one home, one name, one common interest in every
thing. The one who has most physical strength goes
forth to provide supplies; the delicate one remains
behind, by domestic ministries to render home the centre
of all attractions.
</p>

<p>
Then comes the beautiful, helpless infant, of no use
to any one, and demanding constant care, labor, and
attention. And yet, with its profound ignorance, its
tender weakness, its delicate beauty, its utter helplessness,
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
its entire dependence, how does it draw forth the
strongest feelings of love and tenderness, making every
toil and care a delight! And thus, month after month,
both parents unite to cherish and support, while, with
unceasing vigilance, they train the new-born mind to
understand and obey the laws of the system into which
it is thus ushered. Its first lessons are to learn to take
care of its own body. And when the far-off penalty
of pain can not be comprehended by the novice, the
parent invents new penalties to secure habits of care
and obedience. During all this period the great lesson
of <emph>sacrifice</emph> constantly occurs. The child must eat what
is <emph>best</emph>, not what it desires. It must go to bed when it
wants to sit up. It must stay in the house when it
wants to go out. It must not touch multitudes of
things which it wishes thus to investigate. And so
the habits of self-denial, obedience, and faith in the
parents are gradually secured, while the knowledge of
the laws of the system around are slowly learned.
</p>

<p>
But the higher part of the law of sacrifice soon begins
to make its demands. The child first learns of
this law <emph>by example</emph>, in that of <emph>the mother</emph>, that most
perfect illustration of self-sacrificing love. Then comes
a second child, when the first-born must practice on
this example. It must give up its place in the mother's
bosom to another; it must share its sweets and
toys with the new-comer; it must join in efforts to
protect, amuse, and instruct the helpless one. And
thus the family is the constant school for training ignorant,
inexperienced mind in the laws of the system
of which it is a part, especially in the great law of self-control,
for the best good of self, and of self-sacrifice
for the best good of others.
</p>

<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>

<p>
Next comes the discipline of the school and the
neighborhood, when the child is placed among his
peers to be taught new rules of justice, benevolence,
and self-sacrifice for the general good.
</p>

<p>
Next come the relations of the body politic, for
which labors are demanded and pain is to be endured
according to the grand law of sacrifice, by which the individual
is to subordinate his own interests and wishes
to the greater general good, so that the interests of the
majority shall always control those of the minority.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, the whole world is to be taken into the estimate,
and the nations are to be counted as members
of one great family of man, for which every portion is
to make sacrifices for the greater general good.
</p>

<p>
Thus, as age, and experience, and habits of obedience
to the laws of rectitude increase, the duties and obligations
grow more numerous and complicated. But the
same grand principle is more and more developed, that
each individual is to seek the greatest possible happiness
with the least possible evil, for the vast whole as well
as for each subordinate part, while <emph>self</emph> is to receive
only its just and proper share.
</p>

<p>
The same great design of the Creator can be detected
also in specific organizations, by which minds so
differ from each other as to fit them for the diverse positions
and relations that the common good demands.
If all were exactly alike in the amount of constitutional
powers and in the proportionate combinations, it can
easily be seen that the general result would be far less
favorable to the happiness of the whole. But as it is,
some have the love of power very large, and seek to
lead and control; others have it small, and prefer to
follow. Some have elevated intellect, and love to
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
teach; others have humbler capacities, and prefer humbler
pursuits.
</p>

<p>
These varied combinations also give scope to the
virtues of pity, tenderness, patience, mercy, justice,
self-denial, and many other graces that could not be
called into being without all the disparities, social, domestic,
intellectual, and moral, that we find existing.
Meantime the principle of habit and the power of the
will give abundant opportunities for modifying these
natural peculiarities to accommodate to varying circumstances.
</p>

<p>
To these indications of benevolent design may be
added the <q>nature</q> of the bodily system, and the
<q>nature</q> of the material world without. In examining
the body we inhabit, so nicely adjusted, so perfectly
adapted to our necessities, so beautifully and harmoniously
arranged, so <q>fearfully and wonderfully made,</q>
it is almost beyond the power of numbers to express
the multiplied contrivances for ease, comfort, and delight.
</p>

<p>
We daily pursue our business and our pleasure,
thoughtless of the thousand operations which are going
on, and the busy mechanism employed in securing the
objects we desire. The warm current that is flowing
from the centre to the extremities, with its life-giving
energies, and then returning to be purified and again
sent forth; the myriads of branching nerves that are
the sensitive discerners of good or ill; the unnumbered
muscles and tendons that are contracting and expanding
in all parts of our frame; the nicely-adjusted joints,
and bands, and ligaments, that sustain, and direct, and
support; the perpetual expansion and contraction of
the vital organ; the thousand hidden contrivances and
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
operations of the animal frame, all are quietly and
constantly performing their generous functions, and
administering comfort and enjoyment to the conscious
spirit that dwells within.
</p>

<p>
Nor is the outer world less busy in performing its
part in promoting the great design of the Creator.
The light of suns and stars is traversing the ethereal
expanse in search of those for whom it was created;
for them it gilds the scenes of earth, and is reflected
in ten thousand forms of beauty and of skill. The
trembling air is waiting to minister its aid, fanning
with cool breezes, or yielding the warmth of spring,
sustaining the functions of life, and bearing on its light
wing the thoughts that go forth from mind to mind,
and the breathings of affection that are given and returned.
For this design earth is sending forth her
exuberance, the waters are emptying their stores, and
the clouds pouring forth their treasures. All nature
is busy with its offerings of fruits and flowers, its
wandering incense, its garnished beauty, and its varied
songs. Within and without, above, beneath, and
around, the same Almighty Beneficence is found still
ministering to the wants and promoting the happiness
of the minds he has formed for ever to desire and pursue
this boon.
</p>

<p>
We are now prepared to meet the questions proposed,
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>) is the Creator a being who, with the varying
humors of man, sometimes prefers evil to good,
and sometimes prefers good to evil, or does he invariably
choose what is <emph>best for all</emph>, even in cases where
it may involve personal sacrifices and suffering to
himself?
</p>

<p>
In attempting to answer this question, we have set
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
forth the evidence to be found in the works of the
Creator which establishes the position that his <emph>chief
end</emph> or <emph>ruling purpose</emph> is to produce the greatest possible
happiness with the least possible evil.
</p>

<p>
The question then reads, does the Creator destroy
happiness and cause needless pain, and thus thwart his
own chief desire and great end; the end for which he
made all things?
</p>

<p>
The very statement of the question is its most forcible
answer.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that we are obliged to conceive of
God as possessing such a social and moral nature as
our own. This would lead him to desire the veneration,
confidence, love, and gratitude of the children
he has created.
</p>

<p>
But he has formed their minds to hate selfishness
and to admire and reverence self-sacrificing benevolence.
Will the Creator then oppose his own chief
end and grand design by conduct which would make
all his creatures necessarily, by the nature he implanted,
withhold their respect and love, and feel only
dislike and contempt? The very question involves its
own answer.
</p>

<p>
Add to this, that all those causes which our experience
and observation have shown to lead to wrong
choices are necessarily excluded from our conceptions
of the Creator.
</p>

<p>
The Eternal Mind can not err for want of knowledge,
nor for want of habits of right action, nor
for want of teachers and educators, nor for want of
those social influences which generate and sustain a
right governing purpose; for an infinite mind, that
never had a beginning, can not have these modes of
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
experience which appertain to new-born and finite
creatures.
</p>

<p>
Again: Such is the eternal system of the universe,
as we learn it by the light of reason, that the highest
possible happiness to each individual mind and to the
whole commonwealth is promoted by the right action
of every mind in that system. This, of necessity, is
seen and felt by the All-creating and Eternal Mind,
and to suppose that, with this knowledge, he would
ever choose wrong, is to suppose that he would choose
pure evil. It is to suppose the Creator would do what
he has formed our minds to believe to be impossible
in <emph>any</emph> rational mind. It is to suppose that the Creator
would do that which, if done by human beings, marks
them as insane.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXI. Nature of Mind as Perfect in Construction.</head>

<p>
The first article in every system of religion is, who
is the God who controls our destinies, and what is his
character?
</p>

<p>
In attempting to answer this question by the light
of nature, independently of revelation, we have gained
these positions. There is an Intelligent Mind who
created all things, whose natural attributes are the
same as ours in kind, but vast beyond our comprehension
in extent. In moral character, or that which is
exhibited in choice or action, he is perfect in wisdom,
benevolence, and rectitude; that is to say, he is a
being whose chief end or ruling purpose is to do the
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
best he can to make the most possible happiness with
the least possible evil.
</p>

<p>
This being discovered as the grand design for which
all human minds are created, we are thus enabled to
decide as to what is the right and perfect <emph>construction</emph>
or <q>nature</q> of mind, and also as to its right and perfect
<emph>action</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the perfect <emph>construction</emph> of mind, we
must again refer to the fact that in a system of things
where both natural and moral evil exist, we are
obliged to suppose a limitation of power by the nature
of things, so that a system is perfect, not as excluding
all evil; for as evil does exist, a system without any evil
is impossible. All that remains, then, to constitute the
idea of perfection, (as used in reference to things as
they are) is this, that whatever is created by God, is
the best possible in the nature of things.
</p>

<p>
The question then must be this, is the mind of man,
<emph>as a race</emph>, the best in construction, that is possible in
the nature of things? Is our mind made <emph>as good as it
can be</emph>, so that no change is possible that would make
it better?
</p>

<p>
In replying to this question, we must regard the
matter in two relations. We have noticed, in the
chapter on the Constitutional Varieties of the Human
Mind, that while there are powers and attributes of
mind which are common to all, there is an endless variety
of character resulting from the diverse <emph>proportions</emph>
and <emph>combinations</emph> of these several faculties, and
also that there are diverse <emph>grades</emph> of mind, each having
these diverse combinations. Some races of men are
much lower in the scale of being, every way, than
other races, while the same disparity exists among individuals
of the same race.
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<p>
Now when we compare individuals with each other,
or when we compare races in these respects, we regard
them as more or less perfect in organization with reference
to the highest grade or species known to us. In
this relation some minds are to be regarded as imperfect
and defective in organization. And in reference
to any one individual or race in this relation, we feel
that the organization could be improved.
</p>

<p>
But when we regard each mind as a part of a vast
<emph>system</emph>, in which the highest good of the whole will
prove the highest possible good of each individual
part, we are to judge of perfection in the organization
of mind in another relation. If it is for the
greatest happiness of the whole that there should
be grades and ranks in mental powers; if disparities
and varieties in organization give scope and exercise
to virtues and modes of enjoyment that would be impossible
were all minds exactly alike, and on the pattern
of the highest in the scale of being, then the
very points which are imperfections in the individual
relations, become perfections in relation to the great
whole. In this view, the lowest and humblest in the
scale of being, when acting in his appropriate place
and according to the great Creator's design, is perfect
in mental construction, and is fitted to be happier in
every respect than he could be if the whole system
were changed by placing him among the highest in
mental organization.
</p>

<p>
Just as it is with the human system&mdash;the lowly foot
is perfect and complete in its place, though inferior in
construction and service to the regal head and cunning
hand. And should the foot be endowed with the
higher gifts it would be a departure from its perfection
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
in organization as related to the whole. The
question, then, of the <emph>perfect nature</emph> of each human
mind requires that we regard each one as a part of an
infinite system demanding grades and ranks, and thus,
also, relative disparities. And having proved that
the chief design of the Creator is to make the <emph>best
possible</emph> system, we are necessarily led to the conclusion
that the lowest order of mind is as perfect in its
nature, in relation to the great whole, as is the highest
of all.
</p>

<p>
From the above we gain this definition:
</p>

<p>
<emph>A perfect mind</emph>, as to <emph>construction</emph> or <emph>nature</emph>, is one
which is better fitted to its position in the best <emph>possible</emph>
system of minds than it would be by any possible
change.
</p>

<p>
In this use of the words <emph>nature</emph> and <emph>perfect</emph> it is
claimed that in the preceding pages it has been proved
that the mind of man is <emph>perfect in nature</emph>. Our next
inquiry will relate to the perfect <emph>action</emph> of mind in
respect to that which is <emph>voluntary</emph> or <emph>self-originated</emph>.
In other words, we shall inquire as to the <emph>perfect moral
action</emph> of the human mind, as discoverable by reason
and experience, independently of revelation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXII. Right and Wrong&mdash;True Virtue.</head>

<p>
Having discovered the end for which mind is made,
and thus gained the idea of what is meant by perfectness,
in its <emph>nature</emph> or <emph>construction</emph>, we next inquire as
to what is the perfect <emph>action</emph> of mind.
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
Here we must again recognize the distinction between
two classes of mental actions, viz., those acts
which are <emph>natural</emph> as resulting necessarily from the
constitution of mind, of which God is the producing
cause, and those which are <emph>voluntary</emph> and of which
man is the producing cause. The first are <emph>natural and
involuntary</emph>, the latter are <emph>moral and voluntary</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This introduces the second part of the system of
natural religion, that which relates to man's obligations
or duty toward the Creator, toward his fellow
beings, and toward himself. In other words, the
question is, <q>what is <emph>right voluntary or moral action</emph>?</q>
</p>

<p>
In seeking the reply to this without the aid of revelation,
the following particulars demand attention:
</p>

<p>
In all discussions on this question there is no mental
analysis more important than the distinction between
the desire, or what <emph>moves</emph> us to choose, and the act of
choice.
</p>

<p>
The mind is always moved to choice by desire for
some good to be gained or some evil to be avoided.
The susceptibility or power of being thus led, in
popular language is called a <q>bias,</q> an <q>inclination,</q>
a <q>propensity,</q> a <q>tendency,</q> or a <q>proclivity</q> toward
the object which causes the desire. Thus the
susceptibility to desire stimulating drinks is excited
by liquors, and this is called <q>a propensity</q> to strong
drink.
</p>

<p>
The susceptibility to desire to amass money is called
a bias, or propensity to avarice. The only thing ever
meant by a bias or propensity to choose any thing
is, that there are such susceptibilities that desire can be
excited for that thing.
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
But all such propensities or biases are <emph>from evil</emph> and
<emph>toward good</emph> in the widest sense of these terms. No
rational mind ever desires pure evil, but always desires
good of some sort. On the contrary, it is one of the
implanted principles of common sense that <emph>no rational
mind will choose pure evil</emph>. Any man who should do
this would be regarded as insane&mdash;as having lost the
distinctive feature of a rational mind.
</p>

<p>
But we find that desires are called <emph>strong</emph>, <emph>imperative</emph>,
<emph>powerful</emph>, and the like, not at all with reference to
the question whether what is desired would be <emph>best</emph> for
all concerned. They are measured, as to strength or
weakness, by the degrees of enjoyment their gratification
secures, or the amount of pain that self-denial
would involve. This <emph>measurement</emph> of varied degrees
of pleasure and pain is a matter of consciousness to
every mind, and is constantly referred to by all races
and in all languages.
</p>

<p>
In this use of the term, the strongest desire often
exists for that which is perceived to be the <emph>best</emph> good
for all concerned. At other times the strongest desire
is for that which is seen to be the lesser good. When
the strongest desire is for that which is best, the
choice is <emph>easy</emph>, and the mind always chooses the <emph>best</emph>
good. But when the strongest desire is for that which
is not best, then choice is more difficult, and there is
a conscious struggle between the promptings of reason
and conscience, and the importunities of strong
desire for the lesser good.
</p>

<p>
At such periods there is a conscious <emph>power</emph> in every
mind to choose <emph>either</emph> way, and sometimes we choose
to gratify the strongest desire and give up the best
good, and at other times we choose the best good and
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
deny the strongest desire. Every human being has
been conscious of this struggle between excited desire
and the dictates of reason, and all the literature of the
world refers to it as a universal fact. The terms <emph>self-denial</emph>,
<emph>self-control</emph>, <emph>self-government</emph>, all are based on this
experience of all minds.<note place='foot'><p>Metaphysicians have mystified this subject thus:&mdash;They say <q>the
will</q> (or choice) <emph>invariably</emph>, <q>is as is the greatest apparent good.</q>
But when it is inquired, does <q>greatest good,</q> as here used, signify
that which the intellect decides to be <emph>best far all concerned</emph>, and thus
<emph>right</emph>, or does it signify that which causes the <emph>strongest desire</emph> as
measured by our own consciousness? It will be found that, in this
metaphysical statement above, it means <emph>both</emph>. This leads to the same
sort of confusion as would result from using the word <emph>straight</emph> to include
the two ideas of both <emph>straight</emph> and <emph>crooked</emph>. With such an enlarged,
but improper, definition, it could truly be said that men <emph>invariably</emph>
go <emph>straight</emph>, and as truly that they also <emph>invariably go crooked</emph>.
</p>
<p>
The only way in which the expression, <q>the will is as is <emph>the greatest
apparent good</emph>,</q> can be true, is to use the term to include both what is
the greatest good as judged by the intellect, and also the greatest good
as causing the strongest desire, thus making one word express two
<emph>diverse</emph> ideas.
</p>
<p>
It is this want of discrimination in the use of the term <q>greatest
apparent good,</q> by President Edwards, which accounts for the fact
that one class of the most acute metaphysicians regard him as the defender
of free agency, and another class, equally acute, maintain that
he teaches the exactly opposite doctrine of fatalism. It is by this deceptive
use of the words <emph>greatest apparent good</emph>, and <emph>strongest motive</emph>, that
such <emph>invariableness of antecedence</emph> and <emph>consequents</emph> is made out, as is the
proof of <emph>producing causes</emph> and <emph>necessary effects</emph> in the material world.
Thus results the idea of <emph>irrational free agency</emph>, making the mind of man
like irrational brutes, inevitably and necessarily controlled by the
strongest desire, (or strongest motive) and destroying all idea of <emph>rational
free agency</emph>.</p></note>
</p>

<div>
<head>Right Actions and Rewardable Actions.</head>

<p>
The preceding furnishes the ground for the distinctions
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
always recognized between voluntary action
which is <emph>right</emph> as <emph>best</emph> for all concerned, and those
actions which are deemed <emph>praiseworthy</emph>, <emph>rewardable</emph>,
and <emph>meritorious</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Whenever the dictates of reason and our strongest
desire are coincident, so that choosing what is right
and best involves no struggle; then the ideas of merit
and of desert of reward, praise, and commendation are
wanting. We say such acts are right, but there is no
merit in them, and no proper ground for adding any
other reward than that which naturally results from
choosing what we desire most, and which is best for
us and for all concerned.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, when there is a struggle between
a sense of what is right and best, and the strongest desire,
and a choice is made which involves self-denial and
self-sacrifice, we feel that the act is one which is meritorious,
and deserving of reward and praise.
</p>

<p>
Any voluntary action, then, is <emph>right</emph> which is conformed
to those rules of rectitude which tend to secure
<emph>the most</emph> happiness for all, even when there is no
temptation to another course. But an action is <emph>meritorious</emph>
and <emph>rewardable</emph> only when there is a reference
to the rules of rectitude in the mind of the actor and
some degree of self-denial. To choose what we desire
most, without any regard to what is right or wrong,
even when it chances that our choice is that which is
<emph>best</emph>, and thus <emph>right</emph>, does not meet our idea of a meritorious
and praiseworthy act.
</p>

<p>
The greater portion of our choices are of those
things which are good in all relations, as best for self
and best for all concerned. Thus when we desire to
eat, to drink, to breathe the pure air, to admire the
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
beauties of nature, to enjoy the society of friends,&mdash;to
choose these and a thousand other daily blessings,
promotes our own best good and the best good of all
concerned. In all such cases choosing what we desire
most is morally <emph>right</emph> in all relations. But no acts of
choice are <emph>meritorious</emph>, except as they involve a regard
to law in the mind of the actor, and some degree of
self-denial in conforming to rule.
</p>

<p>
The only cases where moral evil (or wrong choices)
can exist, are where desires are excited for some good,
either for ourselves or for others, which is not <emph>best
for all concerned</emph>. In all such cases there is a <q>bias,</q>
<q>tendency,</q> and <q>propensity</q> to choose <emph>good</emph> of some
sort, but it is not the <emph>best</emph> good, and therefore to choose
it would be morally wrong. Thus there is a bias or
propensity to what is good in one relation, but evil in
another; good as tending to give enjoyment, but evil
as contrary to a law which enjoins that the <emph>best</emph> good
should always be preferred.
</p>

<p>
In such cases the <emph>desires</emph> for a good which is not for
the <emph>best</emph> are not morally wrong, for they arise involuntarily
from those susceptibilities implanted by God,
which are not to be exterminated, but only regulated
by law. The moral evil consists not in the <emph>existence</emph>
of such desires, but in <emph>choosing</emph> to gratify them at the
sacrifice of the best good of self or of others.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that one result of the wrong
action of mind is such a change in its constitutional
nature, that there will be a desire to inflict evil on
others as a malignant pleasure to the guilty mind. In
these cases such desires may properly be called <emph>morally
wrong</emph> because they are the result of the <emph>voluntary</emph>
action of the sinful mind, and not of the natural susceptibilities
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
implanted by the Creator. As they result
wholly from wrong previous choices, the guilty mind
itself is the author of them and not the Creator of mind.
</p>

<p>
Here it is important to discriminate in regard to
that natural impulse in all minds which is excited by
the infliction of pain on self or on others. It is this
natural impulse to inflict evil on the author of evil
which is the foundation of <emph>justice</emph> in the family and
in the civil state. Its design is for the best good
of all concerned, and it becomes evil only by excess
and misuse. So long as it is controlled by reason and
conscience it is good and only good.
</p>

<p>
In view of the above distinctions, there can be no
moral evil in <emph>desires</emph> for things which it would be wrong
to choose, <emph>except as these desires are the result of previous
wrong choices</emph>.<note place='foot'>This is a very important point in regard to the question of a <emph>depraved
nature</emph>.</note>
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the principle of <emph>habit</emph> renders
it more and more easy and agreeable to regulate our
choices by the rules of rectitude. The habit of sacrificing
personal gratification to the rule of duty may
be so cultivated that what at first was difficult, and
involved a painful struggle, becomes easy. It is possible
so to cultivate such habits that our highest desires,
and the dictates of reason and conscience, shall
continually be more and more coincident.
</p>

<p>
We can conceive of newly-created beings as placed
in such circumstances that, for a considerable period, all
their strongest desires may be coincident with the best
good of themselves and of others, so that there can be
no opportunity to practice self-control in regulating
their desires by the rules of rectitude. In such a case,
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
while acting simply from impulse, without reference
to rule, they would always act <emph>right</emph>, and yet they
would form no habits of self-control, and thus would
be liable to fail at the first temptation where their
strongest desire conflicted with the known law of rectitude.
</p>

<p>
The preceding statements are made in order to
arrive at correct and discriminating definitions of
certain fundamental terms on which the whole question
of the <q>depraved nature</q> of the human mind will
be found to turn.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Right in Tendency and Right in Motive.</head>

<p>
Mankind in all ages and in all languages speak of
certain acts as right or wrong in reference to their
<emph>tendency</emph> or their effect on human happiness, and without
reference to the intention of the author. Thus they
affirm that the stealing and selling of men is wrong,
whatever may be the motives of the slave trader.
</p>

<p>
Again, they speak of acts as right or wrong in reference
to the <emph>motive</emph> or <emph>intention</emph> of the author. Thus
they say a man who sacrificed his wealth and reputation,
rather than to violate his conscience, acted right
as to <emph>motive</emph>, although he was mistaken in his views of
duty, so that his act, as it respects its tendency, may
have been wrong.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Right General Purpose.</head>

<p>
Again, it has been shown that a man may form a
<emph>general purpose</emph> to act right in obeying all the laws of
God as discoverable by reason or revelation. This
general purpose may be a quiet, abiding principle, so
as to regulate the thoughts and emotions, and may control
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
most of the specific choices of a whole succeeding
life. The <emph>main purpose</emph>, or <emph>chief end</emph> of such a man is
to bring all his thoughts, words, and actions into perfect
agreement with the rules of rectitude. In reference
to this and his consequent conduct, his would be
denominated a <emph>virtuous character</emph>.
</p>

<p>
No one will deny that this is a correct statement of
the use of terms by mankind in every-day life. Thus
then we have gained the following definitions as established,
not by metaphysicians and theologians, but
by <emph>the people</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Definitions.</head>

<p>
<emph>A right moral act</emph>, as it respects its <emph>tendencies</emph>, is one
in which the thing chosen is for the <emph>best</emph> good of all
concerned.
</p>

<p>
<emph>A right moral act</emph>, as to <emph>motive</emph>, is one in which the
<emph>intention</emph> of the actor is to conform to the rules of rectitude.
</p>

<p>
<emph>A meritorious</emph> or <emph>praiseworthy act</emph> is one in which
there is some <emph>sacrifice</emph> of feeling, either immediate or
remote, in order to conform to law.
</p>

<p>
<emph>A virtuous act</emph> is one in which that which is chosen
is right, both in <emph>tendency</emph> and in <emph>motive</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<emph>A virtuous character</emph> is one in which a general purpose
exists to obey all the rules of rectitude. The
<emph>degree</emph> of virtue is dependent on a correct judgment
of what is right or wrong, and the strength or measure
of the general purpose in controlling all other
purposes. Some men carry out a general purpose
much more steadily and consistently than others, and
some men have much more correct ideas of what is
right and wrong in conduct than others.
</p>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<p>
The <emph>natural character</emph> of a man is that which results
from his constitutional powers and faculties of mind,
of which God is the author.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>moral character</emph> of a man is all that results from
<emph>his own willing</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Our highest idea of a virtuous character, as gained
by experience and observation, is that of a mind so
trained to habits of self-control and obedience to rule,
that it has become easier to obey the laws of rectitude,
than to gratify any excited desire, however imperative,
which is seen to violate law.
</p>

<p>
Thus, then, it is shown that a virtuous character consists,
not in the <emph>nature</emph> of the mind which is given by
God, but in the <emph>purposes</emph>, <emph>habits</emph>, and <emph>feelings</emph> generated
by voluntary acts, of which the man himself is the author;
God being the cause or author, of this virtue
only as he is the Creator of mind and of all its circumstances
of temptation and trial.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the formation of a virtuous character,
as a matter of experience, it usually results from a
slow and gradual process of training and development.
The general purpose to obey all the laws of rectitude
originates, as a general fact, not as a definitely formed
purpose, whose time of inception can be distinctly
marked. Yet it is not unfrequently the case that persons
who have passed a life of unrestrained indulgence,
by some marked and powerful influence, are suddenly
led to a decided and definitely marked purpose of virtuous
obedience, and carry out this purpose with great
success.
</p>

<p>
Any such sudden change, in popular language,
would be called <q>the commencement of a new life.</q>
And when this sudden change takes place under the
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
influence of motives presented in the Bible, it is called
by one class of theologians the <q>new birth</q> or <q>regeneration.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Is True Virtue Possible before Regeneration?</head>

<p>
In the discussions which are to follow, it will be
found that almost every point debated involves, as a
foundation question, <q>what <emph>is</emph> true virtue?</q> And
the grand question at issue between the system of
common sense and the teachings of all theologians
who uphold the Augustine theory, is this: <emph>is
true virtue possible to an unregenerate mind</emph>? Theology
says no, common sense says yes. Theology
teaches that previous to regeneration every voluntary
act of every human mind is <q>sin, and only sin.</q>
Common sense maintains, on the contrary, that every
voluntary act which is in agreement with the best
good of all concerned, when the <emph>intention</emph> is to act
right, is virtuous without any regard to the question
of the regeneration of the mind. In other words,
theology teaches that true virtue is the right voluntary
action of a mind after its <q>nature</q> is changed by
God, and common sense teaches that true virtue is
the right voluntary action of any mind without any
change in its nature.
</p>

<p>
The discussion of this point involves the further
consideration of certain mental experiences which will
shed some light on the subject. It will be found that
in case of all persons who are said to <q>act on principle,</q>
or to be <q>conscientious persons,</q> that, in the
greater portion of their voluntary acts, they have no
<emph>conscious</emph> immediate reference to the rules of rectitude.
There seems to be an unconscious general purpose to
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
act right on all occasions, which becomes obvious only
when a case occurs involving a seeming violation of
the rules of rectitude. At such times the mind becomes
conscious of its ruling purpose. But the greater
portion of all the daily acts of life have been decided
upon as in agreement with the all-controlling general
purpose, and a man chooses to do many things in
which he has no <emph>conscious</emph> reference to rule. And
still such acts have, in past time, been subjects of
reflection in reference to the question of right and
wrong, and have been decided to be right, and it is in
consequence of this decision that the mind no longer
considers these questions with a conscious reference
to rule.
</p>

<p>
The distinction between what is denominated <q>a
man of principle</q> and an <q>unprincipled man,</q> is simply
this, that the former is one who has formed habits of
self-regulation by the rules of rectitude, and the latter
has not.
</p>

<p>
This mental analysis is important in reference to
deciding the character of <emph>a virtuous action</emph>.
</p>

<p>
A virtuous act, as defined above, is one in which
the thing chosen is right and the motive is right.
But it is not indispensable that the person who performs
the act should be immediately <emph>conscious</emph> of a
reference to rule in each right specific volition. It
is sufficient that the mind be under the control of a
<emph>ruling purpose</emph> of rectitude, so that all the subordinate
minor purposes are in fact regulated, though unconsciously,
by this purpose.
</p>

<p>
It is at this point that the class of theologians who
make regeneration to include a voluntary act on the
part of man, are in antagonism with the experience
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
and common sense of mankind. Such maintain that
every act of every human being is <q>sin, and only
sin,</q> until a ruling purpose is formed to obey God as
the chief end, and one also which is actually <emph>more</emph> efficient
and stronger in controlling the ordinary acts of
life than the purpose to gratify self. Previous to the
existence of this general purpose, they maintain that
every act of self-denial or self-sacrifice for the good
of others is <q>sin, and only sin.</q> According to their
theory, choosing that which is right because it is right,
is not a virtuous act until a ruling purpose of universal
obedience to God is formed.
</p>

<p>
That is to say, it is the <emph>ruling purpose</emph>, or <emph>the want</emph>
of a ruling purpose to obey God in all things, which
decides the character of every specific act of choice.
Thus if a child is trained to be honest, truthful, and
self-denying, and succeeds very often in conforming to
such instructions, there is no true virtue in any such
acts until a <emph>ruling purpose</emph> of obedience to God is
generated, which is habitually <emph>more</emph> controlling than
the impulses of self-indulgence. This is the point
where <emph>the people</emph> and <emph>theologians</emph> are at issue.
</p>

<p>
The people insist that every act is virtuous when the
thing chosen is right and the intention is right, even
before the mind of a child has attained a ruling purpose
of universal obedience. Theologians say no;
such acts are <q>sin, and only sin,</q> in the sight of God.<note place='foot'>This refers to those theologians who teach that regeneration consists
not in a change of <emph>nature</emph> but of <emph>purpose</emph>.</note>
</p>

<p>
It will be shown hereafter that the theory of theology
on this subject is not carried out consistently in
practice, but that in the early training of little children
theologians contradict their own theory and adopt that
of the people.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>

<div>
<head>Perfectness in Construction and Perfectness in Action
and Character.</head>

<p>
In a previous chapter we have seen [p. <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>] that
our idea of <emph>perfectness</emph> in moral character and action
always has reference to <emph>power</emph>. In a system where
evil is actually existing, we regard a contrivance or
an action as perfect when there is no power in God or
man to make it better, even when evil is involved.
A being is perfect in character and in action when his
purpose is to do the best possible for all concerned, and
when this purpose is carried out to the full extent of
his power.
</p>

<p>
We have shown in the preceding chapter that the
mind of man is perfect in <emph>nature</emph> or <emph>construction</emph> as
being better fitted to its place in the best possible system
of mind than it would be by any change possible
either to God or man.
</p>

<p>
The preceding pages of this chapter enable us to
point out what is the <emph>perfect moral character</emph> of minds
which are perfect in construction. It consists in <emph>a
ruling purpose to discover and to obey all the laws of the
Creator, which is carried out to the full extent of power in
the one who thus purposes</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the Creator himself is
limited by the eternal nature of things to a system
which, though the best possible, makes him, in one
sense, the author of some evil, both natural and moral.
He is the author only as the Creator of all things, and
thus the author of all the consequent results of creation,
even of those that are morally evil. In this sense
alone is he the author of either natural or moral evil.
</p>

<p>
The infinite and eternal mind of God is limited, not
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
by want of wisdom and knowledge, but by the eternal
nature of things of which his own existence and natural
attributes are a part. But finite minds are limited
by a want of knowledge and wisdom which can
be the result only of <emph>experience and training</emph>. For the
want of this knowledge and training every finite
mind, so far as we can discover by reason and experience,
must inevitably violate the laws of God.
And yet any mind may be perfect in moral character
and action in exactly the same sense as God is perfect,
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>) it may form and carry out a purpose to
conform to the laws of the existing system of things
<emph>to the full extent of its knowledge and power</emph>. When this
purpose is formed and carried out to the full measure
of ability, the finite creature becomes <q>perfect, even as
our Father which is in heaven is perfect.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Common Sense Theory of the Origin of Evil.</head>

<p>
What then is the cause or origin of evil as taught
by reason and experience?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>It is the eternal nature of things existing independently
of the will of the Creator or of any other being.</hi>
</p>

<p>
What is the cause of the existence of this created
system? It is the will of the Creator.
</p>

<p>
What is the cause or reason why God willed that
this system should be as it is, with all the evil that exists?
It is because it is the best system possible in the
nature of things.
</p>

<p>
What is the cause or reason that any given event,
however evil, is not prevented by God? It is because
any change that would prevent it, would alter the best
possible system, and thus make more evil than the one
thus prevented.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXIII. Laws and Penalties&mdash;Sin and Holiness.</head>

<p>
The <emph>laws of God</emph>, in regard to voluntary action, are
those <emph>invariable</emph> arrangements in mind and matter by
which happiness or pain are connected with certain
feelings and actions.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is an <emph>invariable</emph> arrangement that pain shall
be connected with touching fire, and pleasure with
seeing the light. So in regard to the intellect; pleasure
is <emph>invariably</emph> connected with the exercise of wit
and humor, and disgust with folly and fatuity. So
the moral sense is <emph>invariably</emph> pleased with truth, justice,
and integrity, and pained by the opposite.
</p>

<p>
Whenever, therefore, we discover what <emph>invariably</emph>
affords pleasure or pain, we discover one of the laws
of God.
</p>

<p>
To discover these laws, and to believe in them, is
as indispensable to the right action of mind as light is
indispensable to perfect eyes in order to see.
</p>

<p>
The first lesson of every new-born spirit is to discover
the laws that relate to its own enjoyment.
Whenever a child chooses any thing which secures
enjoyment without harm to itself or to others, it is
acting as its Creator designed, and this action is therefore
right. And whenever it chooses what will cause
needless pain to itself or to others, it acts wrong.
Most of the choices of a little child are of what is right
as giving enjoyment without harm.
</p>

<p>
The grand law of God, as learned by experience, is
that every mind must <emph>sacrifice</emph> the lesser for the greater
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
good in gratifying its own desires. When the interests
of others are not concerned, the child must always
choose not what it desires the most, but what is best
for itself. It is the first labor of the educator to make
a child understand and obey this first part of the law
of sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
But where the feelings and interests of others are
involved, the law of God is, that the lesser good of the
individual shall always be sacrificed to the greater
good of the many. Each mind of the great commonwealth
is to act, not to make self-gratification the first
thing, but to make the greatest possible happiness with
the least possible evil for the whole commonwealth
the predominant purpose. And such is the system of
the Creator that whatever is for the best good of the
whole is for the best good of each individual.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that <emph>obedience to the laws of God</emph>,
<emph>physical</emph>, <emph>intellectual</emph>, <emph>social</emph>, <emph>and moral</emph>, is to be chosen
as the ruling purpose of each mind. And this is <emph>the
mode</emph> by which all rational beings are to promote the
end or design for which all things are made, (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,)
happiness-making on the greatest possible scale for
the great commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Now</hi> it is very certain that no human mind is
able, by its own solitary investigations, to discover
all the physical, intellectual, social, and moral laws of
God.
</p>

<p>
Many of these laws we can learn by experience, but
for the greater portion we are dependent on the instruction
of others. Therefore <emph>truth</emph> on the part of
educators, and <emph>faith</emph> on the part of the learners are as
indispensable to the right action of mind as is light to
the right action of the eye in seeing. Not a <q>dead,</q>
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
merely intellectual belief, but a <q>saving faith</q> that
controls the feelings and conduct.
</p>

<p>
We now are enabled to define the kind of <emph>inability</emph>
as to obeying the laws of God, which inevitably attends
every mind that commences its existence in this
world. As yet there have never been perfectly <emph>true</emph>
educators of young minds, while perfect <emph>faith</emph>, that is
to say, <q>saving faith,</q> in the teachings that are true is
as much wanting. The young child can not be made
to understand, and therefore can not believe, or have
faith in many of the laws of God and the penalties
connected with them. This no one will deny.
</p>

<div>
<head>Several Classes of Moral Actions.</head>

<p>
There are several classes of moral actions. The
first class includes those which <emph>in all cases</emph> destroy
the best good of man. Of these are wanton cruelty to
helpless creatures, and ingratitude in returning needless
evil for good. In regard to such the mind, by its
very constitutional impulses, revolts from them and
feels them to be wrong without any process of reasoning.
So also all those actions that in all cases cause
enjoyment without evil, are instinctively felt to be
right without any reflection.
</p>

<p>
But there are many actions that are entirely dependent
on circumstances for their moral character. Thus
to punish a little child in one case would be cruel and
wrong, in another it might be benevolent and right.
To take a woman, when not married to another, for a
wife is right, but wrong if she is married. And so
with thousands of other actions.
</p>

<p>
Again, some actions that do no harm to any individual
at a given time, are wrong because they would
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
be destructive to general happiness, if generally allowed;
or, in other words, they are wrong in <emph>tendency</emph>.
Thus, in a given case, a lie might do a great deal of
good and no immediate harm. And yet it would be
wrong, because leaving it to every man's discretion
when it was <emph>best</emph> to lie would in the end destroy all
confidence in human testimony.
</p>

<p>
Again, many of the laws of God can be discovered
only by long experience of many communities. As
soon as experience has shown that any practice will do
more harm than good, then the law of God is discovered
and it becomes obligatory. Thus the question
of polygamy has been settled. Thus, too, the vending
of alcoholic drinks has been decided to be wrong as a
general practice.
</p>

<p>
Here comes up the distinction between wrong choices
that deserve blame and punishment, and those that do
not. In the natural system of the Creator all violations
of law are followed by the natural penalties without
any reference to the motives, knowledge, or ability of
the agent. All questions among men, as to blame and
retribution, have reference to the <emph>adding</emph> of other penalties
and rewards in the present or future state. It is
only in regard to such that the questions of blame, of
justice, and of mercy are to be debated. Without
revelation we have no evidence that the natural penalties
of law are ever suspended, either as a matter of
justice or mercy. In the case of great crimes and
wrongs, that <emph>additional</emph> penalties are to follow in a
future state is what all men fear, and this it is which
induces self-inflictions to secure pardon for sin.
</p>

<p>
Now these are distinctions existing in all rational
minds, and are continually referred to in every-day
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
life. But it is impossible for any but an omniscient
being to decide on all the motives that regulate the
actions of others, while even our own motives are often
so hidden and complex that we are blinded as to their
true character.
</p>

<p>
The language of common life does not always recognize
these distinctions. When a wrong action is done
the actor is called a wrong-doer, and is blamed for the
deed. And the fact that he believed that he was acting
right, and even that he practices self-denial in performing
what is imagined to be a duty, though it palliates,
does not ordinarily end all displeasure. For in
multitudes of cases the ignorance of duty results from
pride or selfish neglect of inquiry. And few are competent
to decide how far the ignorance is a misfortune
and not a fault.
</p>

<p>
It is owing to this fact that most of the language of
life assumes that all violations of law are blamably
wrong, and are to be punished here or hereafter. In
the most common use of the term, <q>sin is the transgression
of law.</q> At the same time men recognize
the distinction between sins of ignorance and willful
sin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Sin and Holiness.</head>

<p>
The preceding, then, warrants the definition of <emph>sin</emph>
as <q><emph>the transgression of law</emph>,</q> whether known or unknown.
The question of the rectitude of penalties
<emph>added</emph> to the natural consequences of violated laws, is
confined to those sins which are attended by a knowledge
of law and ability to understand and obey.
</p>

<p>
These distinctions and definitions are important because
a large class of theologians maintain that sin is
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
the voluntary transgression of <emph>known</emph> law, and make
this definition the foundation of their assertion that all
men have power to be perfect in conformity to all law,
meaning by this all the laws of God that they <emph>know</emph>
and <emph>believe</emph>. On this theory <emph>sin</emph> is the transgression of
<emph>known</emph> law, and not of that which is unknown. And
on this theory one way to keep children from sin
would be to keep them in ignorance of God's laws.
</p>

<p>
The writer maintains that this limited use is not the
common meaning. Mankind do not stop to settle the
question whether men were ignorant of what was right,
before they decide that they sin. Often such ignorance
results from an unwillingness or indolence that prevents
attention, and few can decide how far our ignorance
of law results from guilty neglect. It is true
that when a perfect and innocent inability to know
law is proved, the <emph>added</emph> penalties of statute law are
remitted. But still the <emph>natural</emph> penalties are unremitted.
</p>

<p>
The word <emph>holy</emph> in its original use signifies <emph>set apart</emph>
or <emph>consecrate to the special service</emph> of some deity. Thus
the vessels of a temple, the priests and the building
are called holy in this sense. In reference to moral acts
or choices, this term is used as recognizing the fact that
a mind may be voluntarily consecrated or devoted to
the service of God by right action, or obedience to his
laws. God himself is called holy on the supposition
that there are rules of right and wrong in the nature
of things, independent of his will, and that his will is
conformed to these rules, while men are called holy in
reference chiefly to the will or service of their Creator.
</p>

<p>
In the Creator holiness signifies perfect voluntary
conformity to that which is <emph>for the best</emph> according to the
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
eternal nature of things. In men perfect holiness is
perfect conformity of will to the laws or <emph>will</emph> of God,
both absolutely and in motive or intention. A mind
is consecrated to God when its <emph>ruling purpose</emph> is to
obey him in all things. In this use of the term holiness
in man, is what can not be <emph>created</emph>, as it is a
voluntary act of his own mind.
</p>

<p>
The question whether Adam was created with <q>a
<emph>holy</emph> nature,</q> while his posterity begin existence here
with an <q>unholy nature,</q> must be settled by a clear
definition of the words employed.
</p>

<p>
If the term <q>nature</q> refers to the construction of
the mind itself as made by God, a holy nature must
signify that organization and combination of the natural
powers of mind, which is the best possible for a
mind in its appointed place in the best possible system.
</p>

<p>
If, on the contrary, the term <q>nature</q> refers to that
character of mind consequent on its own volitions,
then a holy nature can be caused or created only by
man himself as the sole <emph>producing cause</emph> of his own
volitions, God being the author or cause of this nature
only in the sense in which men are causes of voluntary
action in other minds, viz., <emph>occasional causes</emph> by
the use of <emph>motives</emph> or objects that excite desires.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_24'/>
<head>Chapter XXIV. Love to God And Love to Man.</head>

<p>
In a former chapter we have noticed the analysis of
the principle of <emph>love</emph>. It is needful to refer to this
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
again, as intimately connected with the question of
the right moral action of finite minds.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that love is a complex exercise, its
first element being agreeable emotions in view of certain
qualities and actions. Combined with these emotions
co-exists a desire of reciprocated regard, that is
to say, a desire to be the cause of similar agreeable
emotions to the one loved. These are constitutional
impulses not at all consequent on any volition or
choice, and as the involuntary element of love, are
properly called <emph>involuntary love</emph>. Such love can not
be justly demanded except where those qualities are,
or can be, perceived which naturally awaken agreeable
emotions. In cases where the qualities exist that
would naturally awaken affection if noticed, and the
want of it is owing to inattention, a proper regard to
such qualities can be justly demanded. But this is
the only particular in which involuntary love can be
made the subject of law and penalties.
</p>

<p>
But the main element of love, as practically estimated
among men, is such a desire of good to the one
loved as involves the <emph>good willing</emph> or voluntary effort
to please and gratify. If a friend simply is pleased
with our good qualities, and wishes to please us with
his naturally agreeable traits in return, it is of little
value in comparison with the truer love which is
shown in <emph>voluntary</emph> efforts to please and make happy.
This last is the main element of true affection, and
properly is called <emph>voluntary love</emph> or <emph>good willing</emph>. Theologians
express this distinction by the terms the <emph>love
of complacency</emph> and the <emph>love of benevolence</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Thus we have gained these definitions:
</p>

<p>
<emph>Involuntary love</emph> toward God and toward men consists
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
in agreeable emotions in view of admirable qualities.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Voluntary love</emph> toward God and toward men consists
in <emph>good willing</emph>, or the voluntary effort to please and
make happy.
</p>

<p>
To <q>love our neighbor <emph>as ourselves</emph></q> must refer
solely to voluntary love, for we have no regard to our
own agreeable qualities in the love of self. Self-love
is simply the desire and will to please and gratify self.
This then is <emph>the kind</emph> of love that can properly be demanded
of all. Each one can justly be required to
will or choose to please and gratify others the same as
we do ourselves. Each can be required to estimate
the happiness of every other mind as of the same
value as his own, and to exercise <emph>good willing</emph> for
others as we do for our own enjoyment. From this
primary principle necessarily results the law demanding
that the good of the commonwealth shall always
take precedence of any individual concern. If we are
bound to value the happiness of each mind as <emph>equal</emph> in
value to our own, the inevitable result is that we are
to estimate the happiness of <emph>many</emph> minds as of <emph>more</emph>
value than our own, so as always to make our own
enjoyment and wishes subordinate and secondary to
the general good.
</p>

<p>
Still more are we to regard the feelings and wishes
of our Creator and Supreme Lord. He has infinite
susceptibilities of enjoyment and suffering, and thus
whatever retards or promotes his wishes and plans
must be of as much more value as his powers of enjoyment
and suffering are greater than ours. The
<emph>love of good willing</emph> then should have first reference to
God as the one whose will and wishes are of more
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
value than any other being in this relation alone.
Still more are we bound to regard his will and wishes
as first in value, because his chief end and aim is the
most possible happiness to all the creatures he has
made. To will to please God as the chief end of our
existence is the same as to choose to make the most
possible happiness, not only to him, but to all his
creatures.
</p>

<p>
Involuntary love is valuable as rendering it easier
and more agreeable to labor for the welfare of others.
Those whose interesting traits please us; those who,
as children or friends, contribute to our enjoyment,
and those who in any way give us pleasure, it is far
easier to will for their enjoyment than it is to do so
for those who do nothing to please us, and perhaps
only give us discomfort, anxiety or disgust.
</p>

<p>
This exhibits an indirect way of securing the love
of good will toward those who neither please us by
their agreeable qualities, nor are causes of enjoyment
to us in any way. Involuntary affection may be so
strongly excited toward one whose qualities or conduct
cause delight to self, that the desire to please
that friend may become more animating than the desire
for any personal gratification. Should such a
friend be deeply interested in the happiness of his
children, or of any other persons, whose character and
conduct may in no way please us, still the desire to
gratify such a friend may lead to good willing to
those whom he loves, for his sake, in order to please
and gratify him.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is that love to parents tends to produce
<q>peace and good will</q> among children, who, in their
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
little broils, are restrained by the desire to please their
parents, when love to each other fails.
</p>

<p>
Here we have a view of the importance of <emph>right conceptions</emph>
of God's character, in order to secure the perfect
action of finite minds, especially in the first stage
of existence.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the rules of right action are
to be gained, in many cases, only by long experience
and by a course of reasoning. Often, too, general rules
(such, for example, as that we are <emph>never to lie</emph>, even to
save life, or for <emph>any</emph> reason,) must be obeyed when a
person can see immediate evil, and no good to self or
to any one by obedience. Now it is impossible for a
rational mind to choose <emph>pure evil</emph>. There must be <emph>some
good</emph> in an object to excite desire, or it is impossible to
choose it. But pleasurable emotions toward an all-wise
Creator, whose benevolence and wisdom excite love,
delight, and confidence, may be such that <emph>to please him</emph>
gives abundant motive to obey the rules of right he
enjoins when no other good can be perceived except
that obedience will please him. And the more we
perceive in him that excites admiration, love, and
gratitude, the more strength of motive is gained.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that a choice or act is <emph>virtuous</emph>
in all relations, when it absolutely is best for all, and
when it is done in reference to a rule of rectitude, or
<emph>because</emph> it is right. The motive or reason of a choice
decides whether or not it is virtuous.
</p>

<p>
Now as the Creator's will and the rules of rectitude
are the same, when we say that any act, in order to
be virtuous, must have reference to God's will, the
question comes up, is an act virtuous <emph>because it pleases
God</emph>, or does it please God <emph>because it is virtuous</emph>? <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
because it conforms to those rules by which his chief
end in creation is secured, and which rest on the eternal
nature of things.
</p>

<p>
The last is the principle here assumed. God's great
end is the highest happiness of his creatures. Obedience
to his laws is the mode for securing this end; his
own actions are right as they conform to this end;
and the actions of all his creatures are right only in
the same relation.
</p>

<p>
So God's <q>glory</q> consists in the highest happiness
of his creatures, which can only be secured by their
obedience to his laws.
</p>

<p>
This makes it clear that choosing as our chief end
to obey all the physical, social, and moral laws of God,
as learned by experience, is the same as loving God
with all the heart, and our neighbors as ourselves. It
is also living for God's glory as the chief end; and
it is being a truly righteous, virtuous, and pious man.
</p>

<p>
This distinction between voluntary and involuntary
love enables us to discover certain dangers that result
for want of such discrimination. Men may conceive
of the Creator as desiring to be loved, admired,
and glorified, just as selfish conquerors, like Alexander
and Napoleon have done. In this view all
their aims would be to excite agreeable emotions toward
God by the contemplation of his various attributes.
And thus they might be so absorbed in the
indulgence of such delightful emotions as to become
entirely heedless of the wants and the wishes of those
around them. This kind of experience would cultivate
selfishness instead of benevolence.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, choosing to obey all God's laws
for happiness-making on the largest scale, and viewing
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
the lovely and glorious attributes of the Creator as
<emph>means</emph> to this end, would induce the only true virtue,
while it is the true mode of pleasing our Maker and
increasing his enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
The preceding furnishes the mode of harmonizing
a great variety of expressions that may properly be
given in answer to the great question, <q>what must we
do to be saved?</q> as we gain this answer independently
of revelation.
</p>

<p>
The first answer is, <q>believe in God's teachings&mdash;or
have faith in God.</q> This means, take the laws of
God as revealed by reason and experience, and <emph>obey</emph>
them, and you shall be saved. It is a <emph>practical</emph> and
not a mere intellectual belief that constitutes this
<q>saving faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
The next answer is, <q>repent,</q> or <q>repentance toward
God.</q>
</p>

<p>
The word repent is used to signify, sometimes, simply
remorse or pain for wrong-doing. In another
sense it signifies that sorrow for wrong-doing which
includes reformation. It is ceasing to disobey law and
commencing a life of obedience. It is in this sense
that men are saved by repentance.
</p>

<p>
Another answer is, <q>thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself.</q>
This has been shown to signify, thou shalt choose as
the chief end of life to make happiness the right way,
that is, by obeying all the physical, social, and moral
laws of God. <q>This is the love of God, that we keep
his commandments.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another answer is, <q>make it thy chief end to glorify
God.</q> Inasmuch as God's glory consists in the
exhibition of his character as a benevolent being, all
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
who promote his chief aim by making happiness according
to his will, are living to glorify God.
</p>

<p>
Another answer is, <q>live a truly virtuous life.</q> It
has been shown that true virtue consists in <emph>obedience to
the great law of sacrifice</emph> by which the lesser personal
good is sacrificed to the greater good of all concerned.
</p>

<p>
Thus faith, repentance, love to God and man, making
it our chief end to glorify God, living a virtuous
life, all signify one and the same thing, (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,) choosing
to find out and to obey all the physical, social, and
moral laws of God as our chief end or ruling purpose.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>righteous</emph> are those who have formed such a
purpose, and who exhibit its results in their daily life.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>wicked</emph> are those who have not formed such a
purpose, and do not exhibit it in their daily life.
</p>

<p>
In the common language of every-day life, when a
person is intensely interested in any pursuit, it is said
to be <q>his life.</q> And when a man changes from a
vicious to a virtuous course he is said to <q>begin a new
life.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus it would be in agreement with the ordinary
use of language to call a new-formed purpose to obey
all the laws of God the commencement of a new life.
And as the beginning of natural life is the commencement
of a life of <emph>impulsive choices unregulated by law</emph>,
the commencement of a life of <emph>obedience to law</emph> would,
by a figure of speech, very naturally be called <q>a new
birth.</q>
</p>

<p>
We have seen, in previous pages, that the formation
of a ruling principle or governing purpose is sometimes
the result of a slow process of educational influences,
and sometimes it is a marked and sudden change. In
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
the history of mind we find, as a general rule, that it
is the slow process of educational training that secures
a virtuous character in childhood, while the more sudden
and marked changes are incident chiefly to more
advanced life.
</p>

<p>
The term <q><emph>regeneration</emph></q> is used by theologians as
meaning the formation of a ruling purpose to love and
obey God, by man himself. By some, this change of
mind is regarded as in all cases instantaneous, by
others as sometimes a gradual and sometimes an instantaneous
change.
</p>

<p>
The preceding still farther exhibits the fact that the
whole foundation of religion and of morals rests on
the answer to the question, what is <emph>true virtue</emph> or <emph>right
voluntary</emph> action?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXV. Increased Civilization Increases Moral Difficulties.</head>

<p>
From the preceding it appears that the more our
race advances in civilization, the more numerous and
complicated are the laws of God which must first be
discovered and then obeyed.
</p>

<p>
By advance in civilization is signified increase in
the capacities of the human mind for varied enjoyments,
and increase in the appropriate supply of these
capacities. The early history of the race resembles
the early period of individual life, when the chief enjoyments
are those of the senses. The refined and
varied pleasures of taste are but little attained except
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
by cultivation. So also the higher pleasures of the
intellect and of the moral nature are dependent on
culture.
</p>

<p>
As every new avenue to enjoyment is opened, and
every new capacity developed, there are inevitably
resulting difficulties and temptations which, experience
soon shows, must be regulated by laws and penalties.
From this results the endless multitude of civil and
statute laws, in addition to the various domestic and
social rules enforced in the family, the school and the
neighborhood.
</p>

<p>
All these laws and rules will be found to be only
specific applications of the great law of sacrifice which
demands that, in all cases, every mind shall choose
what is best for self and best for the whole. The
great democratic principle that the majority shall rule
is but one mode of applying this general law of sacrifice.
</p>

<p>
In this aspect we can perceive how it is, that every
attempt to develop any faculty of enjoyment in any
created mind, and every effort to provide aliment for
such developed capacities is right, as in agreement with
the grand end designed by the Creator; provided it is
done according to the great law of sacrifice disclosed
by reason, viz., that individual enjoyment be made
subordinate to the general good, and that no greater
good be sacrificed for a less, either for self or for the
commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
In this light, music, drawing, painting, sculpture,
architecture, the drama, poetry, laughter, all things
that impart enjoyment to any mind are <emph>right</emph>, provided
no higher good is sacrificed in enjoying them. Nay,
more; all these modes of imparting enjoyment may
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
become positive duties, in cases where they do not interfere
with some higher good.
</p>

<p>
This view of the subject still further illustrates the
nature of that inability which exists in <emph>all</emph> finite minds
in discovering and obeying the laws of God.
</p>

<p>
There are only two conceivable modes by which we
can learn these laws; one is by the <emph>experience</emph> of finite
beings; the other is by <emph>revelation</emph> from the Creator.
To learn what is right and wrong by experience involves
not only the certainty, but the necessity, as it
respects the absolute right, of wrong-doing; for no
one, however right the motive or intention may be,
can discover what will cause more or less good or evil
but by experiments in which the evil as well as the
good is detected by experience.
</p>

<p>
To learn what is right and wrong in all the thousand
and million complications of life by revelation,
would involve the necessity of a direct revelation
every hour of every day, to every individual of the
race. But the only conceivable mode by which revelations
from God are possible, is by miracles and prophecy,
which are interruptions of the ordinary uniformity
of nature. It is the fact that the laws of nature are
uniform that alone makes miracles possible, so that
incessant revelations by miracles would destroy such
uniformity, and thus destroy the only conceivable
mode of communication from the Creator.
</p>

<p>
This being so, the only possible method by which
mankind can discover what is right and wrong in the
greater portion of their actions is by an experience involving,
more or less, wrong-doing as a part.
</p>

<p>
There are <emph>general rules</emph> of right and wrong which
can be communicated both by God and man, but these
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
rules are to be <emph>applied</emph> by men to the numberless and
ever-varying circumstances of life, involving still the
same necessity of <emph>experience of evil</emph> in order to detect
the <emph>relative</emph> amount of good to be gained in the varied
courses offered for pursuit to which these rules are to
be applied.
</p>

<p>
Now the grand difficulty, as it respects both God
and man, as before shown, is the positive inability of
undeveloped mind to understand much of what is
right and wrong. This difficulty meets the mature
mind as really as it does the infant's; for while many
of the general rules evolved by reason and experience
are clear, and easily perceived, there are endless varieties
of cases in which the <emph>application</emph> of these rules
is a matter of uncertainty. For example, that men
are to be honest and speak the truth, are rules universally
appreciated. But then come the questions whether
this and that thing <emph>is</emph> honest, or whether in this or that
emergency it may not be right to say what is false.
The higher men advance in civilization, and the more
means and modes of enjoyment are discovered, the
more complicated become the questions of right, and
the more frequent the temptations to wrong.
</p>

<p>
All that can be done is to cultivate the conscience
and train the reasoning powers of mankind, so that by
means of the experience of life, as developed by individuals
and communities, regard to the rules of right and
wrong shall keep pace with the increasing civilization.
</p>

<p>
With these distinctions in the mind, we can perceive
that <emph>sin</emph>, in its widest sense, including transgression of
<emph>unknown</emph> law, is inevitable in a perfect system of finite
minds, while in the limited sense, as transgression of
<emph>known</emph> law, it is not so.
</p>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<p>
So also we can see, that without the intervention of
the Creator to teach us, it is an impossibility for any
human being to live without sin; so that this intervention
is impossible except to a limited extent, without
an entire change in the eternal nature of things to
which God's own will is conformed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXVI. Humility and Meekness.</head>

<p>
We have seen that we can learn what is right and
wrong only by aid received from the experience of
our fellow-beings around us.
</p>

<p>
But in order to this, there are certain virtues
which are both difficult and indispensable. In studying
the history of mind, it will be seen that the higher
the grade of intellect and the greater its culture, the
stronger is the love of intellectual supremacy and the
more energetic the pride of opinion. It is a fact which
none will dispute, that, as the general rule, having some
exceptions, the class of minds most highly endowed by
native talent and acquired culture, are most unwilling
to take the attitude of <emph>learners</emph> toward their associates,
and still more toward their inferiors in these endowments.
When this pride of intellect and of opinion
is combined with benevolence of disposition and
with sensitiveness of conscience, there is nothing more
difficult than to <q>become as a little child</q> in learning
truth and duty. For the more benevolence and conscientiousness,
the greater the unwillingness to be put
in the wrong.
</p>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
And yet, in the smallest sphere of life, between
every individual and his neighbors, thousands of
questions of right and wrong turn on how our words
and actions will affect the happiness of those around;
and there is no possibility of settling such questions
but by leaving every person at liberty to communicate
freely what does, or does not, give them pain or
pleasure, and thus teach others how to make happiness
and save from pain. In order to this, it is indispensable
that every one be made to understand that our
chief aim is to make happiness the best and right way,
and that for this end we wish to have a perfectly free
expression of wishes and opinions. For if it is perceived
that irritability and alienation result from such
a course, all those around us will conceal their feelings
and opinions, and thus, for want of a true knowledge
of circumstances, we shall <q>walk in darkness,</q> because
we are not willing to be told the truths that put
us in the wrong or expose our mistakes.
</p>

<p>
The same free expression of opinion and protest
against all wrong, are as indispensable to the discovery
of those rules of right and wrong, that are to be evolved
from the general experience. Every man, woman and
child in the commonwealth, should be perfectly free
to set forth their opinions, experience, and reasoning,
for the purpose of finding out what is best for
the whole. Nor should they be withheld by the fear
that such a course would place a parent, a brother, a
friend, or a party in the wrong, and expose those
dearest to us to blame. For the true happiness of
each and all is to be secured by a knowledge of
the truth, and often such knowledge can be gained
only by exposing the evil results of courses that are
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
pursued by the best and most conscientious persons.
</p>

<p>
In carrying out this principle, there must be discretion
exercised as to <emph>time</emph> and <emph>manner</emph> of performing the
duty; and there are some <emph>limitations</emph> to be recognized,
which are matters of <emph>expediency</emph>. For example, a man
must seek the best time to expose what is wrong, and
he must seek to do it in a manner that will secure the
good aimed at with the least possible evil. And if it
can be done better by the agency of another, the aid
of that other should be invoked.
</p>

<p>
So in regard to limitations, what is strictly personal
should be confined to the party who alone is concerned.
What relates solely to the family concerns
should be confined to the family. Nor should any
wrongs or dissensions be brought before the public except
those in which the public welfare is involved.
</p>

<p>
But with these limitations it is the demand of reason
and common sense, that every man, woman and
child freely protest against all that they believe to be
wrong in opinion or conduct.
</p>

<p>
In taking such a course, every man's success in discovering
and propagating the truth will depend very
much on the spirit with which it is attempted. If it
is done in a self-sufficient, dictatorial, and denunciatory
mode, the inevitable result will be to arouse those
passions and prejudices which are most effectual in
blinding the mind in discovering truth.
</p>

<p>
If, on the contrary, it is attempted with the humility,
meekness and benevolence which are befitting
ignorant, fallible and short-sighted beings, encompassed
with such appalling difficulties and dangers,
the most favorable of all influences will be exerted to
secure a patient and candid attention.
</p>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
Still, so sensitive are men to all implications of their
motives or conduct, so unwilling are they to acknowledge
themselves mistaken, that the faithful discharge
of the duty of protesting against wrong, will always
be attended with more or less of ill-will and bad
passions.
</p>

<p>
In view of the above, if we were to predict what
would be the <emph>first</emph> preliminary teaching of a messenger
from the Creator imparting to us the true way of
happiness-making, we should say, reasoning from the
experience of life, it would read thus:
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed are the <emph>poor in spirit</emph>;</q> that is, those who
feel their poverty of mind as to the knowledge required
for right action.
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed are they that <emph>mourn</emph>;</q> that is, those who
are troubled by this want.
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed are the <emph>meek</emph>;</q> that is, those that can
quietly and patiently bear reproof and fault-finding.
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness;</q> that is, those who are as earnest
to find the right way of happiness-making as the
hungry and thirsty are for food and drink.
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed are the <emph>happiness-makers</emph>.</q><note place='foot'>In the Greek, the word in the New Testament translated <q>peacemakers,</q>
is more correctly rendered <q>happiness-makers.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness'
sake;</q> that is, those who are willing to
<emph>suffer</emph> for the right.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXVII. The Standard of Right and Wrong Decided by
The Risks of Eternity.</head>

<p>
It has been shown, that the more the capacities of
men are cultivated, and the sources of enjoyment multiplied,
the more complicated become the varying questions
as to right and wrong moral action, and the more
our reasoning powers and our conscience need to be
cultivated in order to decide correctly.
</p>

<p>
Just as fast as men increase in the number and extent
of the capacities and resources of enjoyment, will
questions of right and wrong multiply, and rules be
evolved, every one of which will rest on the grand
law of <emph>sacrifice</emph>, which demands of every individual
that he shall give up private feelings and choose what
is <emph>best for all concerned</emph>.
</p>

<p>
These difficulties and complications are still more
increased, if we are to take into account an immortal
existence, and the influence which conduct and character
in this life may have on a future eternity. What
is best for each individual, and what is best for the
commonwealth in such vast relations, involve questions
far beyond the reach of human capacities, which
only infinite wisdom can answer.
</p>

<p>
In all questions of right and wrong, for individual
and for public interests, the degree of danger and risk
involved, always is the ruling consideration. The
greater the danger of the commonwealth, or of the
individual, the greater are the demands for sacrifices
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
on the part of all concerned. What would be right
in circumstances of ease and safety, becomes the height
of selfishness and crime in hours of peril and suffering.
</p>

<p>
To illustrate this point on a humble scale, let it be
supposed that a vast and dangerous morass is filled
with a multitude of travelers, of all ages and all degrees
of intelligence, who can press through it to their
homes only by difficult, dark, and circuitous paths.
In addition to its morasses, pit-falls, swamps and fens,
each path is beset with venomous reptiles, and its
woods with ferocious beasts, while it is the young and
tender who are the special objects of pursuit to these
terrific foes. In such a community, and amid such
dangers, all decisions of right and wrong, as to what
was owed to others or to one's self, would be entirely
diverse from what would be demanded were all in
their safe homes. Sleepless nights, constant watching,
painful toils, incessant vigilance, would be the imperious
duty of every one, who could render any service.
Amusements and sports, that in other circumstances
would be wise and right, would be allowed only just
so far as they tended to give relaxation or repose of
mind and body to those who needed them, and only
for the great end of securing a safe and speedy escape
to all.
</p>

<p>
Now suppose that, in these circumstances, some of
the wanderers are taught that there were no such
dangers, that the paths were all safe and certain, and
that every one of them would sooner or later arrive
safely at home.
</p>

<p>
Others are taught that there probably is some danger
and some doubt as to the amount of risks, yet as
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
no one knows much about the matter, on any alternative,
it is very wise to be careful and prudent.
</p>

<p>
Another class are taught that all these terrific dangers
do exist; nay more, that it is certain that some
are to be lost in pit-falls, some torn with wild beasts,
some poisoned to death with venomous reptiles, and
some for ever lost in bleak and cold morasses.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, who should be the lost and who the
saved, and the <emph>number</emph> of the lost, would be entirely
dependent on the care, vigilance, labors and sacrifices
endured by each, not only for self, but for others.
</p>

<p>
It can easily be seen, that in these three classes
there must be an entirely different standard for deciding
all questions of right and wrong. What would
be right and wise, in case there is little or no danger,
would be folly and crime amid such terrific perils. In
one case, each would have little concern or responsibility
for any but self; in another case, all benevolent
minds would be overwhelmed with anxiety for others
as well as for themselves.
</p>

<p>
This being so, it is claimed that the deductions of
reason as to the future immortality of man, and his
risks and dangers beyond the grave, are indispensable
to deciding multitudes of moral questions of the highest
moment, while every person's standard of morality
must be regulated by their decision of this question.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Chapter_28'/>
<head>Chapter XXVIII. The Destiny of Man in the Future Life.</head>

<p>
It has been shown, that the teachings of reason as
to the immortality of the soul, and our risks and dangers
after death, are indispensable to a true standard
of morality, and to the decision of innumerable moral
questions of the highest moment.
</p>

<p>
The next attempt, therefore, will be to set forth
what can be learned by reason and experience, independently
of revelation, in regard to the future destiny
of man.
</p>

<p>
The first question relates to the existence of the soul
after death, and its immortality. Here we have to
guide us that great principle of common sense, which
regulates mankind in all the practical business of life,
viz., <emph>things are, and will continue according to past experience,
until there is evidence of a change</emph>.
</p>

<p>
By the aid of this, we go forward in all practical
affairs, believing that the beings and things around us
are continued in existence till we have evidence that
they are not. If any man were to talk and act as if
every person was destroyed, and every town and village
annihilated, as soon as the evidence of his senses
failed, he would be deemed one who had <q>lost his
reason.</q>
</p>

<p>
This same principle tends to the belief that the soul
of man continues to exist after the dissolution of the
body. We have <emph>no evidence</emph> that the separation of
soul and body is an event that either injures or destroys
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
the spiritual part. On the contrary, there are
many analogies in nature that would lead to the impression
that death gives new strength and powers to
the disembodied spirit.
</p>

<p>
This being so, we have the same reason to believe
that the soul of man exists after death as we have for
believing that our friends are living when they leave
us on a journey, and we have no evidence of their
death. We can not see them, hear them, or feel them,
and yet we believe they are living, we know not exactly
where, because we have no evidence of their
death. And so, after the dissolution of the body,
though all evidence of sense as to the existence of
their immaterial part ceases, we believe the same thinking,
sentient spirits continue to exist, because we have
no evidence that they have ceased to do so.
</p>

<p>
We have perfect evidence that the body ceases to
exist as a body, for it moulders to dust. We have no
evidence at all that the soul is either injured or destroyed.
Such a thing as the destruction or annihilation
of a spirit was never known or heard of from any
quarter of earth or heaven.
</p>

<p>
We therefore conclude, that at the moment of death
the soul is still existing with all its powers unchanged.
</p>

<p>
The same argument goes on still further, and leads
to the immortality of the soul. We know of no cause
or reason for the destruction of the soul at any future
period. We never have known or heard that any
soul ever ceased to exist. And so we infer, that the
soul will keep on a perpetuated existence, by the same
principle as that which leads us to believe the earth
and the heavens will remain to future ages.
</p>

<p>
In regard to the <emph>character and condition</emph> of departed
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
spirits, again we have the same principle to guide us.
Without revelation, the <emph>past experience</emph> of mind is our
sole beacon to give light as to its future destiny.
</p>

<p>
Our next inquiry, then, is, what does the past experience
of mind teach us as to its condition beyond
the grave? In pursuing this inquiry, we must recall,
in brief forms, some of the points of mental experience
set forth in previous chapters.
</p>

<p>
Some of the most important of these relate to the
principle of <emph>habit</emph> by which the exercise of all our faculties
becomes more and more easy by use. This is
true of the intellect, by which we gain our knowledge
of what will secure <emph>the most</emph> happiness; of the
<emph>social</emph> nature, by which we give happiness to other
minds and receive the same from them; of our <emph>moral</emph>
nature, by which we are guided to justice, equity, and
the rule of conscience; of our <emph>voluntary</emph> nature, by
which we regulate all our other powers. Each and
all are developed, strengthened, and facilitated in right
action, by being exercised according to the laws of
God.
</p>

<p>
The legitimate use of all our faculties induces also
not only increased facility, but increased <emph>enjoyment</emph>.
The more the intellect is trained, the more agreeable
its exercise. The more our social nature is developed
by use, the more its powers are developed and its
<emph>blessed</emph> influence increased. The more our moral nature
is exercised, the more vigorous becomes our sense
of justice and the sensibilities of conscience, and the
more pleasing their exercise. And the more the will
is exercised in controlling every other faculty by the
rules of rectitude, the more easy and delightful is this
power of self-control.
</p>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
The influence of habit in regard to the great law of
<emph>sacrifice</emph> for the <emph>best</emph> good of all, is especially to be regarded.
Such is its power that, in many cases, self-sacrifices
that at first were annoying, or even painful,
become sources of the highest and noblest enjoyment.
</p>

<p>
Another not less important influence of habit is, in
regard to those modes of enjoyment which are most
important to the commonwealth, and most happifying.
The pursuit of these increases both desire and capacity
for gratification, while those less important and more
dangerous, if made the leading object of pursuit, diminish
capacity while desire is increased. Thus the happiness
gained in giving and receiving affection, in causing
happiness to others, and in rectitude of action, all
increase both the desire and the capacity for these
important and elevated modes of enjoyments. Nor
is there any danger of excess in forming habits in
these directions. But the pleasures of the senses and
the pursuit of power, honor, and other enjoyments
that terminate in self, are liable to excess, and this
excess diminishes the capacity for enjoyment, while
the ceaseless craving of desire remains.
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that a mind that forms habits of
happiness-making according to right rules, becomes
more and more strongly drawn to that course by finding
more and more enjoyment in it, while a mind that
pursues as a chief end the enjoyments that terminate
in self, constantly loses capacity for such good, and
yet the desire for it drives on to vain and cheerless
efforts.
</p>

<p>
Another ominous fact in our mental nature is, the
effect of habit in diminishing the control of the voluntary
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
power. When any excessive or illegitimate mode
of exercising the faculties becomes a ruling passion,
the <emph>change</emph> of a habit thus formed becomes more and
more difficult in exact proportion to the continuous
repetition. Even when men see and feel that a habit
is formed that increases their sorrow and diminishes
their enjoyment, and that another course would render
them every way nobler and happier, they find
their purposes of change often are powerless. The
control of the will continually yields to the force of
habit, and so they are hopelessly driven on in their
fetal pursuits.
</p>

<p>
Again, the effect of wrong action on the susceptibilities
is as ominous as it is on the power of choice.
We have seen that the design of painful emotions is
to stimulate to the formation of good habits, and that
when this legitimate object is not effected these emotions
continually decrease in strength and vividness, so
that the designed benefit is lost. Thus <emph>fear</emph> is designed
to induce habits of caution, but if no such habits are the
result, danger ceases to excite this emotion, and a man
becomes at once fearless and careless. So with sympathy
in the sufferings of others; if no habits of benevolent
efforts to relieve are induced, that sensibility
diminishes, and men become at once unsympathising,
hard and cruel. So it is with <emph>shame</emph>; if it does not
lead to habits of honor and duty, the susceptibility
continually diminishes. And so it is with <emph>remorse</emph>;
if habits of rectitude are not induced by its emotions,
the conscience becomes <q>seared as with hot iron.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the most deteriorating effect of wrong action is
seen in regard to that fundamental point of the mental
constitution which makes it a source of happiness to
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
be the cause of happiness to others. It is a universal
fact that the tendency of disagreeable emotions is to
lead to the infliction of pain on others. This propensity
to inflict pain on whoever is the cause of pain,
when regulated by the rules of rectitude, is the source
of justice in the family and state, and leads only to
good. But when it is indulged and unregulated, it is
the most fearful feature in our mental constitution.
The records of history exhibit many monsters of our
race, whose mental constitution has become so disordered
by habits of fatal indulgence, that all love of
happiness-making for others seems destroyed, and the
baleful pleasure of tormenting becomes a ruling passion.
</p>

<p>
Another feature of our mental conformation which
directly bears on this subject, is the fact, that all those
good qualities and benevolent acts which naturally
tend to please and awaken the desire of good to others,
may become sources of pain and ill-will. This is
the case when the lovely and benevolent traits of other
minds are contrasted with opposite traits in self. Thus
it is that the selfish, cruel and malignant hate and are
powerfully repelled from the generous, just and virtuous,
while the good as instinctively fly from the
wicked.
</p>

<p>
The natural result of these features in the nature of
mind, is a continual tendency toward a separation of
the good and the bad, the righteous and the wicked.
</p>

<p>
According to the teachings of experience, a mind
that forms habits of selfishness and sin is constantly
tending to a deterioration of its nature in all directions.
And the course of obedience to the grand law
of self-sacrifice for the <emph>best</emph> good of all, becomes more
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
and more difficult and improbable. As the natural
result the good are more and more attracted toward
each other, and the bad are more and more repelled.
</p>

<p>
These tendencies, so plainly exhibited here, reasoning
from experience, we infer are to continue after
death, until the final result must be the entire exclusion
of the evil from the good, whenever power exists
to compel the separation. This power, all must feel is
held and will be exercised by the Author of all minds,
whose great plan, so far as reason teaches, can be carried
to perfection only by such a consummation.
</p>

<p>
One point in the history of our race has a mournful
pertinence to this question. We find that the improvement
and the safety of the great commonwealth is always,
more or less, promoted by the ruin of individuals.
Multitudes are deterred from evil courses by the
miserable end of those who pursue them; so that the
good are often preserved by the destruction of the
bad.
</p>

<p>
So, too, we find exhibitions of the fact that minds
are utterly ruined, and ruined <emph>for ever</emph>, so far as we
can perceive. The man who has stultified his intellect,
ruined his health, seared his conscience, and
blunted all his generous and benevolent sensibilities
by a course of debauchery, cruelty and crime,
is a wreck as total and irretrievable, so far as we can
see, as a watch whose springs and pivots are crushed
beneath the hammer, or a human body whose every
lineament is effaced beneath the rushing locomotive
train.
</p>

<p>
The common language of life expresses such mental
facts in precisely the same terms as are applied to
physical catastrophes. Thus, a man who is given
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
up to debauchery, intemperance and crime, is said to
be a <q>total wreck</q>&mdash;<q>entirely destroyed,</q>&mdash;<q>utterly
ruined.</q>
</p>

<p>
Add to this the teaching of experience, that when
men are bad, the increase of blessings only increases
indulgence and crime. At the same time punishment
does not tend to reformation. The more men suffer
for their folly and guilt, the more hardened they become.
The victims of licentiousness and intemperance,
though they suffer such miseries, have ever been
regarded as the farthest removed from the probabilities
of reformation.
</p>

<p>
Add to all this, the deductions of reason as to the
moral nature of the Creator and Governor of all minds.
He has power to separate the good and bad; his great
design, of which we here see only the <emph>tendencies</emph>, makes
it indispensable to the perfect happiness of the good
that they be separated from the bad&mdash;a <emph>perfectly</emph> happy
commonwealth can not be attained where the bad
form a part&mdash;while the <emph>sense of justice</emph> exists in God on
a scale far above ours, demanding <emph>added</emph> penalties for
the known and willful destruction of happiness. He,
like his children on earth, feels that craving for retributive
justice, which can never rest till the guilty and
remorseless monster receives the just recompense for
his cruelty and crimes.
</p>

<p>
These teachings of reason and experience lead to
the conclusion, not only that there is to be a grand consummation
in which all sin and suffering shall be ended
in a perfected commonwealth, but also to the conclusion
that those excluded from this community of
the good are to continue their existence in sin and its
natural results for ever.
</p>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<p>
That any portion, either of matter or mind, is to be
annihilated, can not be inferred from any past experience.
All that we can learn are the laws of perpetual
<emph>succession</emph> and <emph>change</emph>. One single fact of annihilation
has never yet been made known to man by any process
of reasoning, or any recorded experience.
</p>

<p>
There is another question in reference to this awful
subject, which is of deepest interest. Although the deductions
of reason lead to the doctrine of the eventual
separation of mankind into two distinct communities,
the good and the evil, what are its teachings as to the
<emph>immediate</emph> state of each individual soul after the event
of death?
</p>

<p>
Here, as before, we have only the nature and past
history of mind, from which the future is to be deduced.
In this world we have found the changes in
the character of individuals and of communities to
proceed by slow and imperceptible movement. We
have nothing in the past to lead to the belief that this
slow process of discipline, culture and change may not
proceed on for ages. As in this life, multitudes have
the impress and direction of character given in early
life, so that the first few years determine all their future
history in this world, so the career of this short
life may fix the future through eternal years. And
yet the process of change to the full consummation of
character may involve ages.
</p>

<p>
In studying the works of the Creator, we find that
every thing goes forward on a system of <emph>developments</emph>.
Nothing comes into being in full perfection, and unless
there is an interruption of the natural tendencies of
things, every thing reaches its full and perfected state
before its existence ends. And the nobler, larger,
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
and grander the existence, the slower it proceeds to
its consummated perfection. The oak and the palm
demand centuries ere they reach their perfected prime.
The highest grades of animal life are slowest in gaining
their full development. The horse, the elephant,
and the camel, are going forward to perfection for
years after the feebler tribes that started with them
have perfected and perished.
</p>

<p>
Guided, then, by the analogies of experience, we
should infer that <emph>mind</emph>, the noblest work of its Creator's
hand&mdash;mind, that begins its career in such low
and feeble development, is not to form the mournful
exception to the general rule.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, we infer from all past experience,
both of matter and mind, that the soul, when it lays
aside its outer covering, proceeds onward in its career
of development. And if its period of progressive development
is proportioned to its relative value in comparison
with all other created things, the fleeting years
of this life in relation to the ages previous to its prime,
may be but as the first days of puling infancy to the
whole career of manhood.
</p>

<p>
But this subject is imperfectly treated, if we neglect
to consider the fact, that the soul, so far as we can perceive,
is <emph>disembodied</emph> at death. We have perfect evidence,
that the material part is destroyed, as to its
organized existence. We have the same sort of evidence
that the soul continues to exist, and will continue
to exist, as we have that the sun exists when all
evidence of sight ceases. But what is the experience
of a disembodied spirit, we have no means of learning.
It may be that its powers of knowledge and action are
greatly increased, when freed from its earthly prison.
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
If this be so, the experience of this life leads to the
inference that its dangers and temptations are increased
in exact proportion. Increase of civilization is only
increase in sources of knowledge and enjoyment, and
each addition brings new temptations, new rules, and
the need of new penalties. It may be the same in the
future life.
</p>

<p>
We can suppose the body a veil to hide our mind
from another, and that death makes every soul <q>open
and naked,</q> in all its thoughts and feelings, to every
other disembodied spirit. What would be the effect
of such a revelation, no one could say. But we should
fear rather than hope.
</p>

<p>
If men are exasperated by words that exhibit only
a portion of the scorn, contempt, and disgust felt
toward the base and mean, not only by the pure and
good, but by the wicked themselves, such a <emph>full revelation
of all minds to all minds</emph> presents a theme for
awful forebodings to the guilty. And even the purest
might tremble to encounter such an ordeal. But
over such terrific conjectures rest the darkness and
silence of the grave.
</p>

<p>
The following, then, are the deductions of reason
and experience as to the future condition of our race
after death.
</p>

<p>
The soul, at the dissolution of the body, remains
unchanged in its tastes, habits and character. The
<emph>tendencies</emph> indicated in this life are continued indefinitely,
and eventually will result in the separation of
the good and the bad into two separate communities,
the one, being obedient to all the laws of God, will be
for ever and perfectly happy, and the other are to
reap the natural results of disobedience, and whatever
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
added penalties the best good of the universe may demand.
</p>

<p>
The final consummation in which this separation
will be achieved, may be at the distance of ages, and
in the meantime all those minds that have passed, or
will pass from this life, are in the same process of culture,
discipline, and upward or downward progress,
which exists in this life. Whether these advantages
and temptations will be greater or less in the disembodied
state, we have no data for inference or conjecture.
</p>

<p>
The conduct and character formed in this life will
have an abiding influence on the character and happiness
of every mind through eternal ages.<note place='foot'><ref target='Note_B'>Note B</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXIX. What Must We Do To Be Saved?</head>

<p>
We have considered the risks and dangers of the
future state, as taught by reason and experience, and
also as the foundation of a true standard of morality.
We have seen that the true mode of escape from these
dangers is <emph>the formation of a truly virtuous character</emph>, or
in other words, <emph>it is making it our chief end to obey all
the laws of God</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The next question is, what are the teachings of reason
and experience as to the most successful modes of
securing true virtue, or voluntary obedience to all the
laws of God?
</p>

<p>
This brings up the inquiry as to the <emph>causes</emph> of voluntary
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
action, and of the power which one mind has
of securing right or wrong volitions in another.
</p>

<p>
In a previous chapter was pointed out the distinction
to be recognized between the <emph>producing</emph> cause and
the <emph>occasional</emph> causes of volition.
</p>

<p>
Mind itself is the <emph>only</emph> producing cause of its own
volitions. Excited desires, and those objects which
excite desire, are the <emph>occasional</emph> causes of choice.
</p>

<p>
The question is, in what sense can any being be
the cause of virtuous actions, or virtuous character,
in another mind?
</p>

<p>
Here we must recur to the fact that the Creator, as
the author of all minds, and of all the things that excite
desire, is the cause, in one sense, of all the volitions
and of all the characters of all finite minds.
It is in this sense that, in the Bible, the Jehovah of
the Old Testament says, <q>I make peace and <emph>create
evil</emph>.</q> No other being but the Creator can be regarded
as the cause of volitions in this sense, viz., as
the author of all minds and their circumstances of
temptation.
</p>

<p>
There is a second sense in which the Creator is
never the cause of sinful action in any mind. It is
this: creating or modifying our susceptibilities, or
arranging temptations with <emph>the design</emph> or <emph>intention</emph> of
producing sinful action. This is established by proving,
that the chief end of God is to make the most
possible happiness, and that sin is the needless destruction
of happiness, resulting from disobedience to
the laws of God.
</p>

<p>
The only sense, then, in which God can be called the
author or cause of sinful volitions in the minds of his
creatures, is the fact that he is the author of all created
minds and of their circumstances of temptation.
</p>

<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>

<p>
In regard to man, there are only two conceivable
modes, in which he can be the cause of sinful or virtuous
character in other minds.
</p>

<p>
The first mode is so to combine circumstances of
temptation as to affect the most excitable and powerful
sensibilities, or to remove those objects and influences
that sustain moral principle, or by a long course
of training, to form habits and induce principles. The
combinations of motive influences that one mind can
thus bring to bear on another, as temptations to right
or wrong action, are almost infinite.
</p>

<p>
Another mode is by <emph>changing the constitutional susceptibilities</emph>.
This can sometimes be effected to a certain
degree by education, and the formation of habits.
It can be still more directly effected through the physical
organization. For example, a child may be trained
to use coffee, tea, alcohol, or tobacco, till the nervous
system is shattered, and then a placid temper becomes
excitable, an active nature becomes indolent, and multitudes
of other disastrous changes are the result.
</p>

<p>
When these two modes are employed with the <emph>design</emph>
to induce wrong action, then men are blameable
causes of sinful action and character in their fellow
men. God, as above shown, never thus causes sin.
When these modes are employed with the <emph>intention</emph>
to induce virtuous actions and character, then both
God and man are causes of right moral action in mankind.
</p>

<p>
Thus, it appears, that in the formation of virtuous
character and habits, God, educators and self are the
three combining causes, each being indispensable to
the result, and thus each dependent on the others.
God decides the nature and combinations of our susceptibilities
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
and our circumstances of temptation. The
educators of mind also modify the susceptibilities, and
regulate the temptations. Self, as the producing cause
of volition, decides the nature of our own volitions,
and thus also coöperates to regulate circumstances of
temptation.
</p>

<p>
The attainment of virtuous character, therefore, depends
conjointly on God, man and self. It has been
shown that God <emph>invariably</emph> does <emph>the best he can</emph> to secure
the most perfect action possible in all minds.
</p>

<p>
The blamable causes of all failure in right and virtuous
action are self and the finite educators of self.
The unblamable causes are God, educators and self,
so far as they are faithful in doing <emph>all they can</emph> to educate
aright.
</p>

<p>
With these preliminary considerations, we proceed in
the inquiry as to those modes which in past experience
have been found most successful in securing virtuous
character, or voluntary obedience to the laws of God.
</p>

<p>
The first cause of right moral action is a <emph>knowledge</emph> of
and <emph>faith</emph> in the physical, social, intellectual and moral
laws of God. It is impossible, in the nature of things,
that a new-created mind should be possessed of such
knowledge and faith. All that is possible, so far as
we can learn by reason and experience, is that there
should be a slow and gradual development not only
of each individual mind, but of the whole race, as
each generation, in turn, receives by instruction the
experience of the one previous, and transmits it with
its own experience to a succeeding generation.
</p>

<p>
The next thing that has been found efficacious in
forming virtuous character is the formation of uniform
<emph>habits of obedience to parental rule</emph>, in the early periods
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
of existence. To secure this, <emph>invariable steadiness in
government</emph> has been found indispensable. If a child
finds that sometimes he is to obey and sometimes he
is not, there is always a temptation to struggle against
law. But if a parent's laws, rewards and penalties
are as steady and sure as those of God, in due time the
child submits as cheerfully to the domestic rules and
commands, as he does to the laws of nature. He is no
more tempted to contest parental commands than he
is to attempt to stop the flow of a river or the falling
of rain. In this way a habit of submission to law is
generated, which makes all the future discipline and
training of life comparatively easy. A child learns
cheerfully to obey a heavenly Father, just in proportion
as he thus obeys his earthly parents.
</p>

<p>
The next thing taught by experience is that children
should be instructed as fast as possible in the
<emph>reasonableness and benevolence</emph> of all the laws they are
required to obey. Obedience is made easy and sure
just in proportion as a child is made to perceive, that
such obedience is <emph>best for himself and best for all concerned</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The next thing which experience has shown to be
most effective in securing obedience to law, is <emph>love</emph> on
the part of the educator, and corresponding love in return
from the child. To gain the love of a child an
educator must exhibit all lovable traits, and confer
benefits, so as to call forth at once admiration, gratitude
and affection. This renders it easy to the child
to conform to the rules and wishes of one so beloved.
</p>

<p>
Sympathy with a child in all its trials and in all its
enjoyments, still further increases this power of another
mind in right guidance.
</p>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<p>
This sympathetic influence is greatly increased by
the power of a virtuous <emph>example</emph>&mdash;especially if this
example is exhibited by a beloved friend and benefactor,
who would be gratified by thus guiding a dependent
mind.
</p>

<p>
Another influence that tends to secure virtuous action
is the bearing of pain and hardships even when
it is not voluntary. Those children who are trained
in a cold clime and on a hard soil, and who are early
trained to hardships, find it far easier to conform to
rule, and to bear sacrifices for the general good, than
those whose lives have been a course of uninterrupted
ease and indulgence.
</p>

<p>
To these, add the social influences of the example
and sympathy of a surrounding community. Where
all around are practicing virtuous conduct&mdash;where all
admire and praise only what is good and right&mdash;it is
far easier to secure obedience to the rules of rectitude,
than where the example and sympathy of surrounding
minds are opposed to virtue.
</p>

<p>
But the most powerful of all influences in securing
virtuous action, is the principle of love and gratitude
toward some noble benefactor, who saves from some
terrible evils at the expense of great personal suffering
and sacrifices, and who seeks his reward in the
pleasure of redeeming those thus benefited, from the
snares and ruin of sin. And the greater the evils
averted, and the more severe the suffering on the part
of the benefactor, the stronger the influence thus
gained to secure virtuous character and action in the
one thus rescued.
</p>

<p>
These are the influences which experience has
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
shown to be most effective in securing virtuous character.
</p>

<p>
When the question is asked, <q>What must <emph>we</emph> do to
be saved?</q> it may be answered in reference to all concerned
in the matter; that is to say, <q>What must
self do&mdash;What must our fellow-men do&mdash;What must
the Creator do, to secure obedience to his laws, and
thus to save from sin and its penalties?</q>
</p>

<p>
In view of the above teachings, each one for himself
must seek, first, <emph>knowledge</emph> of the laws of God,
and of their rewards and penalties as discovered by
the experience of mankind. In order to do this, each
must take all means to gain <emph>true</emph> teachers, and to receive
their teachings in true <emph>faith</emph>, that is, that <emph>practical</emph>
faith, which includes the purpose of obedience.
Each must cultivate the intellect, the reason and the
moral sense, in order to judge correctly in receiving
and applying the rules of rectitude; each must seek
to discover the reasonableness and benevolence of
these laws, and form <emph>habits</emph> of steady obedience; each
must seek to discover and rightly to appreciate all the
good and lovable qualities of all who institute and
administer laws, from the Creator to all subordinate
rulers and governors in the domestic and civil state;
each must seek the society of those whose sympathy
and example would encourage and promote virtuous
conduct; and finally, each must make obedience to
all the laws of God the <emph>chief end</emph> or ruling purpose.
These are briefly the reply to the great question in
relation to self.
</p>

<p>
We are next to consider this question in relation to
what men must do to <emph>save others</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Here we are to take into account two subjects previously
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
illustrated; the first is that great law of <emph>sacrifice</emph>,
by which each individual must make his own
wishes and welfare subordinate to the higher interests
of the great commonwealth; the second is the fact
that all questions of right and wrong are dependent on
the <emph>risks and dangers</emph> that threaten the commonwealth.
In cases where there is little peril or evil, each individual
has little responsibility for others. On the
contrary, when all are exposed to terrific dangers and
hazards, every individual is bound to think and care
as much for the danger of each one as for his own.
And just as much as the interests of all are of more
value than those of one, so much <emph>more</emph> should each
place the public welfare above that of self.
</p>

<p>
In a preceding chapter have been exhibited the
risks and dangers of our race in reference to the future
life. These are such, that without any appeal to revelation,
every man of humanity and benevolence must
feel that to save his fellow-beings from such dangers
should become immediately his leading object of pursuit,
his <emph>chief end</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In pursuing this as the main object of life, each individual
is bound to follow the teachings of experience
as to the most successful modes as set forth above.
Each one, then, should become a <emph>teacher of the laws of
God</emph> to all who are in ignorance, to the full extent
of his power, and set forth all the motives to induce
obedience; each should strive to exhibit all those
qualities and deeds which will excite admiration, love
and gratitude, in order thus to gain influence over
other minds and guide them to virtuous conduct.
Each should confer benefits and practice self-denying
benevolence toward others and thus gain still farther
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
influence. Each should strive to exhibit that <emph>example</emph>
and that <emph>sympathy</emph> that are so effective in leading
others aright.
</p>

<p>
In regard to those who are the educators of the
young, each must strive to maintain that <emph>invariable
steadiness in governments</emph> which is so effective in forming
virtuous habits and in rendering obedience to the
laws of God more and more easy.
</p>

<p>
Finally, it should be the aim of each to establish
such a <emph>community</emph> around all who are being trained to
virtue, that every social influence shall repress vice and
encourage virtue.
</p>

<p>
Next, we are to consider the great question in reference
to the Creator. What then must God do to save
our race from sin and its miseries? What would reason
and experience teach us to expect he would do to
secure obedience to his laws?
</p>

<p>
In answering this question we must again refer to
the causes which experience has shown to be most effective,
for we can conceive of no other. We have
examined the evidence that the Creator has given to
each of his children such a constitution of mind and
body, and such circumstances of temptation and trial
as is <emph>best on the whole</emph>, as a part of an infinite <emph>system</emph>
whose results are to develop through eternity. At
the same time it has been shown that God is limited,
by the eternal nature of things, to a course in
which <emph>some</emph> evil must exist, so that all that is requisite
to his character as perfectly benevolent, is that
this evil should be reduced by him to its least possible
amount.
</p>

<p>
To suppose that God can impart at creation of each
mind all the knowledge of the millions of rules needed
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
for all the myriads of new relations, of myriads of beings
through all eternity, is to suppose an impossibility
in the nature of things.
</p>

<p>
If it be maintained that the Creator is not thus limited
by the nature of things, but, as theologians teach,
could make mind perfect in all needed knowledge as
in all other respects, at the first, then we have the
greater contradiction involved in the fact, that a perfectly
benevolent being chose for his children ignorance
and sin in preference to knowledge and virtue.
</p>

<p>
To say that it may be <emph>best</emph> to create minds destitute
of all needed knowledge when the want insures infinite
wrong and suffering, and when there is power to
create the knowledge that would insure perfect happiness,
is simply a direct contradiction. It is saying
that <emph>less</emph> happiness may be <emph>greater</emph> than <emph>greater</emph> happiness.
For by <q>what is for the best</q> we understand
<q>that which secures the <emph>most</emph> happiness.</q> And saying
that making misery where there is power to make
happiness in its place, is <emph>best</emph>, means nothing else but
the assertion above, that less happiness is greater than
greater happiness; or that <emph>less</emph> is <emph>more</emph> than <emph>most</emph>, which
is a contradiction, inconceivable and absurd, so that
no mind can either comprehend or believe it.
</p>

<p>
Now, every theologian of every school and of every
sect maintains that <q>God does all things <emph>for the best</emph>.</q>
Every one who believes in a benevolent Creator does
the same. This is simply saying that God does the
best possible; that is to say, there is no power that
can make a better system than God has made, or administer
it with more wisdom or benevolence. He
has chosen the best possible and so he can not do any
better.
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
These things being granted, the teachings of experience
would lead us to suppose, still farther, that
the Creator must do all that is possible to maintain <emph>invariable
steadiness of government</emph>. We can see that this,
which is so important in family government, must be
still more so in an infinite family. For this end, the
natural penalties for wrong doing, must be as <emph>invariable</emph>
as the rewards for well doing.
</p>

<p>
Again, the Creator must instruct his creatures in his
laws and their rewards and penalties to the full extent
of his power. That is to say, he must provide well-trained
educators of mind, as fast and as fully as is
possible in the nature of things, having in view the
results of eternal ages to guide his decisions.
</p>

<p>
Again, to secure voluntary obedience, he must
add to the natural rewards and penalties of his laws,
the other class of motives which experience has
shown to be most effective. Thus, he must present
himself to his creatures as a being possessing all
those qualities which call forth the delightful emotions
of admiration, reverence and love; he must show
himself as a constant benefactor, and as one who
<q>does not willingly afflict or grieve the children of
men.</q> He must manifest his love to his creatures by
word as well as by deed. He must come personally to
provide for their wants and cheer them with his care.
He must show his tenderness and sympathy in their
trials and sorrows as well as in their joys. And if
they are exposed to great dangers and evils from
which they can be redeemed by self-sacrifice and suffering
on his part, this highest and most effective
proof of love must be exhibited.<note place='foot'><ref target='Note_C'>Note C</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
To this must be added, a manifestation of his <emph>chief
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
desire</emph>, so that when love and gratitude ask, what can
we do to please our benefactor in return, the answer
shall be, obey his laws, and work and suffer for the
good of all, as you see your Heavenly Parent does for
you.
</p>

<p>
Finally, he must bring around each of his creatures
the powerful social influence, not only of his own sympathy
and example, but those also of a perfect commonwealth,
where all shall be perfect as is the Father
of all.
</p>

<p>
This is what we should evolve by the light of reason
and experience, as what the Creator must do to
save our race. Whether he has done all this, is a
question that belongs to that system of religion which
we can gain only by revelation from God.<note place='foot'><ref target='Note_D'>Note D</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXX. How Far Reason and Experience are Sufficient
Without Revelation.</head>

<p>
The preceding chapters present the system of natural
religion, as it may be gained by experience and
those principles of reason or common sense with
which all men are endowed.
</p>

<p>
Whether mankind ever have, or ever would, fully
evolve this system of religious belief without any aid
by revelation from the Creator, is a question which
we can not readily decide&mdash;inasmuch as the claim of
Christianity is, that from the first, our race have been
instructed by revelations from God, which have been
more or less preserved in traditions and written records.
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
It is certain that the elimination of this system, by
unaided humanity, is dependent on the development
of both the intellectual and moral powers, just as
much so, as the physical discoveries of Newton, Copernicus
and Columbus were dependent on the intellectual
progress of the race.
</p>

<p>
In reference to the question of the necessity or importance
of revelations from the Creator, it is interesting
to examine how far those nations that have been
most advanced in intellectual development, have secured
this system of common sense, independently of
the revelations contained in the Bible&mdash;revelations
which also have been more or less incorporated by
Mohammed into the Koran.
</p>

<p>
In a brief review of the pagan systems, that of
Boodhism occupies the first place, as one which has
had longest and largest control over civilized pagandom&mdash;one
which has been most unimpeded by resistance,
and one which now controls <emph>one half</emph> the human
race.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that the common-sense system teaches
an eternally self-existent Creator, perfect in knowledge,
wisdom, power and benevolence, administering
a perfect system by laws&mdash;his chief design being to
produce the most possible happiness with the least
possible evil. It teaches also, that the right <emph>voluntary</emph>
action of mind, as a part of this system, consists in
<emph>good willing</emph> toward the Creator, toward self, and toward
our fellow-beings, <emph>according to the laws</emph> of God,
so as to secure what is <emph>best</emph> for all concerned&mdash;making
it imperative that self be made subordinate to the
public good. It teaches also, that the most effective
mode of securing this right action is, first, by imparting
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
a <emph>knowledge</emph> of these laws and their sanctions, and
thus influencing mind by the motives of <emph>hope</emph> and
<emph>fear</emph>; next, by the motive influences of <emph>love</emph>, <emph>gratitude</emph>,
<emph>sympathy</emph> and <emph>example</emph>, as mutually exercised by God,
our fellow-men and self. Finally, it teaches that all
questions as to what is right and wrong, are to be regulated
with reference to the risks and dangers of a <emph>future
life</emph>, and not with chief reference to this life alone&mdash;and
that in this estimate the interests of self are to
be made subordinate to those of the commonwealth.
</p>

<p>
We will now notice how far the system of Boodh
corresponds with that of common sense.
</p>

<p>
This religion<note place='foot'>This account is taken from Rev. Howard Malcom's <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Asia</hi>.</note> is one in which there is no intervention
of any supreme God, or any self-existent being,
or any Creator; on the contrary, all souls and all the
universe exist from eternity. All souls from eternity
have gone on transmigrating from one body to
another, rising or falling in the scale of existence
according to their merit or demerit. Boodh is a general
name for a divinity or god. There have been
innumerable Boodhs in different worlds and different
ages, but in this world only four. These four are beings
who have risen by merit through various transmigrations,
and then became incarnate in human
bodies. At last they were annihilated, none of them
being now in existence&mdash;so that this world for centuries
has been without any God.
</p>

<p>
The last Boodh of this world was Gaudama. He
passed through innumerable transmigrations in four
hundred millions of worlds, and attained immense
merit. At last, he was born into this world the son
of a king, about six hundred years before Christ.
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
The moment he was born he exclaimed, <q>Now am
I the noblest of men; this is the last time I shall ever
be born!</q> He remained forty-five years as Boodh of
this world&mdash;performed all sorts of meritorious deeds,
promulgated excellent laws, and then was annihilated.
Ever since, this world has had no God, and will have
none for eight thousand years, when the next Boodh
is to appear. The first three Boodhs left no laws or
sayings. Those of Gaudama, the last Boodh, were
reduced to writing A. D. 94, and these are the <hi rend='italic'>Bedegat</hi>,
or Bible of the Boodhists.
</p>

<p>
These teachings of Gaudama are so obligatory, that
disbelief of them is the only crime that incurs <emph>eternal</emph>
punishment.
</p>

<p>
According to this system, true virtue or rewardable
merit, consists in obeying the teachings of Gaudama.
These teachings relate first to sins to be avoided. The
five general laws are, not to kill, not to steal, not to
commit adultery, not to lie, and not to drink intoxicating
liquors. These are subdivided so as to include
all sins of similar kinds under each head. For
example, the first law includes even the killing of animals
for food, also capital punishments and war.
</p>

<p>
Sins are divided into these three classes: first, those
of the body, such as killing, theft, fornication, etc.;
those of the tongue, as falsehood, harsh language, idle
talk, etc.; and those of the mind, as pride, covetousness,
envy, heretical thoughts, etc.
</p>

<p>
These writings of Gaudama strongly denounce the
evils of pride, anger, covetousness, and all inordinate
appetites. Men are exhorted to avoid excess in perfumes,
ornaments and laughter&mdash;also strong drink,
smoking, opium, night wanderings, bad company,
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
idleness, anger under abuse, flattery to benefactors,
annoying jests, and all that leads to strife.
</p>

<p>
For all such sins the most awful conceivable punishments
are to follow in a future state, and for millions
of ages.
</p>

<p>
Rewardable merit is of three kinds:
</p>

<p>
1. Obedience to all the preceding precepts and prohibitions,
and the performance of all duties <emph>fairly deducible</emph>
from them, such as integrity, gentleness, lenity,
forbearance, condescension, veneration to parents and
love to mankind in general.
</p>

<p>
2. Alms-giving and votive offerings. This includes
feeding priests, building temples and accommodations
for priests and for travelers, making roads, tanks and
wells, planting fruit and shade trees, feeding criminals
and animals, and finally, giving alms to all classes of
men in need.
</p>

<p>
3. Prayers and reading the Bedegat, or religious
books. Of this last kind of merit, there are three
kinds: the first is the senseless repetition of prayers
and reading; the second, reading intelligently; the
last, is performing these exercises with strong desires
and feelings. Prayers are not addressed to any God,
as there is none existing now for this world. Gaudama,
at his death, advised that, in addition to obeying
his laws, his relics and image should be worshiped,
and temples be built to his honor till the next
Boodh came.
</p>

<p>
Votive offerings of fruit, rice and flowers are made
to priests or placed in temples. The prayers consist
of the repetition of soliloquies that express our liability
to bodily evils and to mental suffering, and our
inability to escape. Also of protestations of this kind,
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
<q>I will not lie;</q> <q>I will not steal;</q> <q>I will not kill,</q>
etc.
</p>

<p>
There are four Sabbaths or days for public worship
each month, when the people go with votive offerings
and prayers to the temple of Gaudama, but they have
no general united worship.
</p>

<p>
The Boodhists have a hierarchy very much like the
Catholic church, with varied grades and ranks. The
priests are required to practice celibacy, and are mainly
supported by voluntary gifts from the people.
</p>

<p>
They reside in buildings erected especially for them,
and as celibacy and the avoidance of women are enjoined
on all, these establishments very much resemble
Catholic monasteries. Few of the priests preach,
and only by special request, after which, presents are
made to them. They attend funerals only when invited,
and then expect presents. Part of them spend
some time in teaching novitiate priests, but most of
them, regarding work as unprofessional, spend their
time in sheer idleness. It is the rule that each priest
perambulate the streets every morning till he receives
boiled rice enough for his daily wants. The higher
class of priests avoid this. In Burmah the priests are
at the rate of one to every thirty persons, and they are
well supported by the people, and without interference
from the government to enforce it.
</p>

<p>
As to the motives that sustain this religion, there
being no God to the Boodhist, all motives arising
from relations and regard to him are excluded. All
the motives presented appeal to hope of good and
fear of evil to <emph>self</emph>. Those who attain a certain
measure of merit in obeying Gaudama's teachings go
to some of the celestial regions, according to their attainments.
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
These consist of twenty-six heavens, one
above another, which offer various degrees of enjoyment
according to merit obtained.
</p>

<p>
There are eight principal hells; four that torment
with cold and four with heat. In the other hells are
other sufferings, although not connected with heat and
cold. Worms bite, bowels are torn out, limbs are
racked, bodies are lacerated, they are pierced with hot
spits, crucified head downward, gnawed by dogs, torn
by vultures. These are described with minuteness in
the <hi rend='italic'>Bedegat</hi> and often depicted by the native artists
in drawings, reminding one of Dante's Inferno illustrated.
</p>

<p>
For killing a parent or a priest a man will suffer in
one of the hells of fire for inconceivable millions of
ages. Denying the doctrines of Gaudama incurs <emph>eternal</emph>
suffering in fire. Insulting women, old men or
priests, receiving bribes, selling intoxicating drinks
and parricide, are punished in the worst hell.
</p>

<p>
Merit gained by any good conduct in these hells
enables the person to rise even to the celestial regions.
</p>

<p>
The souls of all the universe have existed from
eternity, transmigrating for ever, and thus rising and
falling in the scale of existence according to the degrees
of merit at each birth. This is decided not by any
deity but by immutable fate. In passing through these
changes the amount of sorrow is incalculable. The
Bedegat declares that the tears shed by one soul in
its various changes are so great that the ocean in comparison
is but a drop. Sorrow is declared to be the
inevitable attendant of all existence, and therefore
<q>the chief end,</q> and the highest reward of Boodhism
is, <emph>annihilation</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<p>
The system of Boodhism commenced about six
hundred years before Christ, and has pervaded eastern,
central and southern Asia about as long and as
fully as Christianity has pervaded Europe. The Burman
empire, where this account of that faith was obtained,
presents the most favorable results of this
system on the character and condition of its votaries.
</p>

<p>
In China, Buddhism (another name for Boodhism)
is the popular religion. With it is associated Confucianism,
which is a system of morals and politics instituted
by Confucius, B. C. 550, which teaches nothing
in regard to any God or a future state. With them
co-exist the sect of Laotze, which is a kind of rationalism.
Most of the temples and priests are those of
Boodh or Budda, but there is no such organized
priesthood as in Burmah, nor is this religion maintained
by governmental power. It is also considerably
modified by the more ancient system of polytheism.
</p>

<p>
In Thibet and Tartary, the religion of the Grand
Lama chiefly prevails, which is one form of Boodhism.
</p>

<p>
In western India, Brahmanism is in constant warfare
with Boodhism, and the two systems are perfectly
antagonistic. Brahmanism teaches one eternal deity
and three hundred and thirty-three millions of other
gods, with hosts of idols representing them; Boodhism
has no deity at all, and only one image, that of Gaudama.
Brahmanism enjoins sacrifices; Boodhism forbids
killing. Brahmanism requires atrocious tortures;
Boodhism inculcates fewer austerities than even Popery.
Brahmanism makes lying, fornication and theft
sometimes commendable, and describes the gods as
excelling in such crimes; Boodhism never confounds
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
right and wrong, and never excuses any sin. Brahmanism
makes the highest good or chief end of man to
be absorption into the supreme deity; Boodhism makes
<emph>annihilation</emph> the highest hope and aim of existence.
These two systems, together with Mohammedanism,
so prevail in Hindostan that the distinct results of each
can never be compared. These are the prevailing religions
in the most advanced pagan nations at the present
time; and of the two, Boodhism is the best, and
probably has been the most fairly tested in Burmah.
</p>

<p>
In past ages the two most highly developed heathen
nations were those of Greece and Rome, and of their religion
we have the fullest records. It is not probable
that any one will consider their system of religion superior
to this now exhibited of modern paganism.
</p>

<p>
The result is that the most highly developed heathen
nations, as yet, have attained but very imperfectly the
system of common sense.
</p>

<p>
No heathen religion ever taught an eternally-existing
Creator, perfect in knowledge, wisdom, power and
benevolence. None ever taught that the chief end of
our Creator is happiness-making on the greatest possible
scale. None ever taught that this also is the chief
end for which man is created. None ever taught that
right moral action, or true virtue, consists in <emph>good willing
toward the Creator, toward self, and toward our fellow-beings,
according to the laws of the Creator, so that every
mind shall make the good of self subordinate to the general
good</emph>. None ever taught that all questions of right and
wrong, or what is for <emph>the best</emph>, are to be decided with
reference to the risks and dangers of a future life.
None ever presented communion with, and the care,
sympathy, sacrifices, and example of a <q>long-suffering</q>
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
Creator, as motives to secure virtuous self-sacrifice
from his creatures. If all this is taught by
revelations from God in the Bible, it is what was
never taught by any other religion yet known on
earth.
</p>

<p>
In the history of the heathen world, we find anxious
inquiries on these subjects pressing on every thoughtful
spirit. Who made this world with its profound and
ceaseless sorrows? Are there contending deities, and
are the malignant powers in the ascendant? If there
be one supreme Creator of all, is he propitious or hostile
to a race so guilty as ours? Does he feel any
pity or sympathy for our profound ignorance, our infinite
sorrows? Can we do any thing to gain his help
in our darkness and misery? Where do we go when
we die? Does our short and painful span of being
end in eternal night, or are we to go on in another
career of similar suffering and change? When we
lay our beloved ones in the grave, shall we ever meet
them again, or is <q>the only proper utterance of a
broken heart, <foreign rend='italic'>vale, vale, in eternum vale</foreign>?</q>
</p>

<p>
These have been the mournful questionings of every
age and every race, while the wisest sages of the wisest
nations, without a revelation, have been unable to
give any satisfactory reply.
</p>

<p>
Greece and Rome were the most civilized of all ancient
nations, and they give us Socrates, Plato, Aristotle
and Cicero, as their best and wisest men, who
most deeply pondered these great questions. Aristotle
held to one superior deity, but taught that the
stars are true and eternal deities. Cicero leads to
the belief of many gods, and approves of worshiping
distinguished men as gods. Socrates held to a plurality
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
of deities, and also to transmigration. He held
that the common sort of good men will go into the
forms of bees, ants, and other animals of a mild and
social kind. Plato held to two principles, God and
matter, and that God was not concerned either in the
creation or government of this world. He argued for
the immortality of the soul on the ground of its <emph>pre-existence</emph>,
and concludes some of his speculations thus:
</p>

<p>
<q>We can not of ourselves know what will be pleasing
to God, or what worship to pay him; but it is
needful that a lawgiver be sent from heaven. Such
an one do I expect, and O how greatly do I desire to
see him, and who he is!</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXI. Augustinian Creeds and Theologians Teach the
Common-Sense System.</head>

<p>
In the former portion of this work the Augustinian
theory, with the system based on it, has been presented
as it is taught by creeds and theologians. In contrast
with it, has been presented the common-sense
system of religion as evolved by reason and experience.
</p>

<p>
The evidence will now be presented, to show that
those who teach the Augustinian system, at the same
time teach the main points of the common-sense system;
and where the two systems are contradictory,
that they teach <emph>both</emph> sides of the contradiction, at once
affirming and denying the same things.
</p>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
A leading feature of the common-sense system is,
that the <emph>nature</emph> of the human mind is our only guide
to the natural attributes of God.
</p>

<p>
It will now be shown that leading theologians
and metaphysicians of the Augustinian school teach
the same.
</p>

<p>
The Calvinistic theologians of New England have
been universally acknowledged as among the most
acute and profound metaphysicians in the world.
At the head of these stands President Jonathan
Edwards. In reference to our modes of gaining a
knowledge of God, he says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>If respect to the Divine Being is of any importance, then
speculative points are of importance, <emph>for the only way we can know
what he is, is by speculation</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Dr. Woods, for near half a century a leading theological
teacher of New England, says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>All our particular conceptions of God may be found to take
their rise from <emph>the conceptions we form of created intelligences</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Dr. Emmons, a distinguished New England divine,
says of man:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>In the very frame and constitution of his nature he still bears
the natural image of his Maker. In a word, man is the living image
of the living God, in whom is displayed more of the divine
nature and glory than in all the works and creatures of God upon
earth.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Dr. Taylor, the New Haven divine, says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The only ultimate source of knowledge, and ultimate umpire
of truth, is <emph>the knowing mind</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<p>
The celebrated Scotch metaphysician, Sir W. Hamilton,
says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>We can know God only as we know ourselves.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In proof of this from the Bible, these writers quote
from the Apostle James, that <q>men are made after
the similitude of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another leading feature of the common-sense system
is the position, that we can discover the chief <emph>end</emph>
or <emph>design</emph> of the Creator, by <emph>the nature</emph> of his works,
and that this end is to produce the greatest possible
happiness with the least possible evil.
</p>

<p>
It will now be shown that leading theologians teach
the same.
</p>

<p>
President Edwards, in his <hi rend='italic'>Dissertation concerning the
end for which God created the world</hi>, teaches that
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>What God had respect to as an <emph>ultimate end</emph> of his creating
the world, was <emph>to communicate of his own infinite fullness of good</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
He teaches that God is in no way dependent on his
creatures for happiness, but that his enjoyment consists
in outpouring his own good to his vast family.
</p>

<p>
No one can read that essay without perceiving that,
though disconnected passages may make a different
impression, the above is a correct statement of the doctrine
of that dissertation.
</p>

<p>
It is supposed that this view has been assented to
by most of those American and European theologians
who most strenuously defend the Augustinian system.
</p>

<p>
The end or design of mind being ascertained, its
<emph>right mode of action</emph> is thus determined. Accordingly
we shall find that the great New England divines and
metaphysicians, though they use different language,
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
all express the same idea in defining true virtue or
holiness.
</p>

<p>
Thus President Edwards taught, as his son states,
that
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Every voluntary action which, in its general tendency and
ultimate consequence, leads to happiness&mdash;happiness <emph>in general</emph>&mdash;happiness
<emph>on the largest scale</emph>&mdash;is virtuous; and every such action
which has not this tendency, and does not lead to this consequence,
is vicious.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Here let it be noted that President Edwards expressly
teaches that it is not voluntary happiness-making,
irrespective of the amount, that constitutes
virtue; but it is <q>happiness <emph>in general</emph>&mdash;happiness
<emph>on the largest scale</emph>.</q> This corresponds exactly with
the common-sense system, demanding that happiness-making
be on the <emph>greatest possible scale</emph>, and in order
to this, it must be <emph>according to law or rules</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Dwight, whose system of theology is accepted
as the most satisfactory exposition of the new school
Calvinistic views, teaches that
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>True virtue is the love of doing good, or the love of promoting
happiness. Its excellence consists in this, that it is the <emph>voluntary</emph>
and only source of happiness in the universe. God wills our happiness;
it is, therefore, right, it is virtuous in us, to seek to promote
it both here and hereafter.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In this case, the language of Dr. Dwight is not so
discriminating and clear as that of President Edwards&mdash;for
he does not show so clearly as does President
Edwards that his real meaning is voluntary happiness-making
<emph>on the largest scale</emph>. In this, and all the following
quotations from other writers, it is a fact, as
gained by their <emph>combined</emph> expressions, that the distinction
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
made by President Edwards was accepted, and
that by the <q>love of doing good,</q> or the <q>love of
promoting happiness,</q> is intended that <emph>voluntary love</emph>
or <emph>good willing</emph> which seeks not merely some good,
but the <emph>best good</emph> of all.
</p>

<p>
Dr. Taylor, the distinguished successor of Dr.
Dwight, teaches the same doctrine, as is so abundantly
manifest in his published writings, that no
quotations will be deemed needful.
</p>

<p>
The Westminster Assembly's Catechism teaches
that
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The chief end of man is to glorify God and enjoy him for
ever.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The glory of God can be secured only by true virtue
in himself and in his creatures; and if this consists
in voluntary happiness-making on the greatest possible
scale, then the chief end of man, as taught in
that old standard of orthodoxy, is exactly the same
as is taught in the system of common sense. Man is
to make happiness on the greatest possible scale, guided
by the laws of God&mdash;and thus doing, he will <q>glorify
God and enjoy him for ever.</q>
</p>

<p>
The same theologians also teach that the laws of
God are our guide as to what is good and evil, and
that true virtue, or right action, is secured only by
obeying these laws. They hold, therefore, the doctrine
of common sense, that all true virtue consists in
voluntary obedience to the will of God as manifested
in his natural and revealed laws.
</p>

<p>
The next point of agreement is in the proposition, that
God always has, and always will do what is <q><emph>for the
best</emph></q>&mdash;so that it always is and will be, out of his power
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
to do better&mdash;inasmuch as <emph>to do better than best</emph>, is a contradiction
and absurdity. Every theologian, in one
form of words or another, maintains that God always
has done, and always will do, <emph>the best he can</emph>, so that
he has no power to do better. This being so, it is the
same as teaching that the past, present and future existence
of sin and misery, is what is inevitable in the
best system which God has power to create, so that
any change in God's plans, laws, and their results,
would imply an act of folly and malevolence on his
part.
</p>

<p>
This does not imply that the sinful conduct of
man is what is desired or intended by the Creator&mdash;nor
does it imply that sin was desired or intended
by God as the <q>necessary means to the greatest good.</q>
Instead of this, it is clear that if it had been <emph>possible</emph>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
if God had the power&mdash;to create all minds with
<emph>all the knowledge and all the motives</emph> that would secure
perfect obedience to law from all the race of Adam,
there would have been more happiness. The universal
obedience of all free agents to all God's laws for
making happiness on the greatest possible scale, would
secure perfect happiness to all, while every act of disobedience
would lessen the amount. To deny this is
the same as saying that less happiness is more than
the most happiness, which is absurd.
</p>

<p>
The result is, that sin is not the fault of the Creator,
but is the inevitable result of the commencement
of finite, ignorant, inexperienced minds, and is what
neither God nor man could prevent, in a perfect system
of finite, free agents.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, it is the fault of all free agents
who sin when they have adequate knowledge and
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
motives. And it is only sins against <emph>known</emph> law and
appropriate motives which are the proper subject of
penalties <emph>in addition</emph> to the natural consequences of
wrong doing.
</p>

<p>
It is claimed, therefore, that when theologians teach&mdash;as
all do&mdash;that <q>God orders all things for the best,</q>
they really teach, in another form, the common-sense
doctrine as stated above.
</p>

<p>
Having gained the teachings of leading theologians
as to the nature of true virtue or right voluntary
action, we also gain their definition of wrong moral
action, or <emph>sin</emph>. In the words of President Edwards,
<q>Every <emph>voluntary</emph> action which in its general tendency
and ultimate consequence leads to happiness&mdash;happiness
<emph>in general</emph>&mdash;happiness <emph>on the largest scale</emph>&mdash;is
virtuous; and every such action which <emph>has not this</emph>
tendency, and <emph>does not</emph> lead to this consequence, is
vicious,</q> or sinful.
</p>

<p>
That is to say, every volition that tends to lessen
the general happiness, is vicious or sinful, and every
violation of God's physical, social and moral laws, has
this tendency. Thus the Bible definition of <emph>sin</emph> is
the one accepted by theologians&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <q><emph>sin is the
transgression of law</emph>,</q> without reference to the question
whether the law is known or not. <emph>True virtue</emph> is voluntary
obedience to law, and <emph>sin</emph> is the voluntary
transgression of law. These definitions then are a
part of the Augustinian system as much as they are
of the common-sense system.
</p>

<p>
The next point of the common-sense system taught
by theologians, is that our moral power to obey God&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
power to choose according to law instead of
impulse&mdash;is proportioned to our knowledge of law,
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
and the motives of fear, hope, love and gratitude, as
they are employed by God and man.
</p>

<p>
This doctrine is taught by all theologians, except
those who hold that the sin of Adam so ruined the
human mind, that there is no power of <emph>any</emph> kind to
obey God, except as he gives new capacities. No
quotations will be given to establish this point, because,
it is believed, that no one will question it.
</p>

<p>
No quotations are needed to show that the Augustinian
creeds and theologians agree with the common-sense
system, in teaching that the soul is immortal&mdash;that
our destiny in a future state depends on our
conduct in this life&mdash;that there is to be an eternal
separation of the righteous and the wicked, whose
immortality will be happy or miserable according to
their characters.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXII. Augustinian Creeds and Theologians Contradict
the Common-Sense System, and Thus,
Also, Contradict Themselves.</head>

<p>
The preceding chapter shows the agreement of distinguished
Augustinian theologians with the leading
points of the common-sense system. We next are to
notice the particulars in which these theologians and
the Augustinian creeds contradict the common-sense
system, and thus, also, contradict themselves.
</p>

<p>
The grand point, which involves these contradictions,
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
is the dogma that all mankind have a <emph>depraved
nature</emph> consequent on the sin of Adam, which makes
it certain that every voluntary act of every human
mind is <q>sin, and only sin,</q> until this depravity of
nature is more or less rectified by the Spirit of
God. The opposite of this is the common-sense doctrine
that all men have a <emph>perfect nature</emph>, created by
God, which is unchanged and not in any way depraved
by the sin of Adam.
</p>

<p>
As involved in this common-sense view, <emph>true virtue</emph>
consists in the <emph>right action</emph> of a perfect nature, as it now
is. In opposition, Augustinianism teaches that true
virtue consists in the right action of a depraved nature
<emph>after</emph> it has been more or less renewed by the
Spirit of God.
</p>

<p>
Common sense claims that the indispensable requisites
to secure right voluntary action are, <emph>knowledge</emph>,
<emph>training</emph> and <emph>motives</emph>, for which we are dependent on
God, on man, and on self, conjointly. In opposition,
Augustinianism claims that knowledge, training and
motives are of no avail to secure true virtue, until the
damage done by Adam's sin to the nature of every
human mind, is more or less rectified, and that for this
we are entirely dependent on the Spirit of God.
</p>

<p>
Common sense claims that man, at birth and through
life, is entirely unable to obey many of the physical,
social and moral laws of God, for want of adequate
knowledge, training and motives; but that he is fully
able to obey these laws as fast as he has the appropriate
knowledge, training and motives, and that before
regeneration he does perform truly virtuous acts. Augustinianism,
in opposition, claims that man never
obeys the laws of God acceptably until the Spirit of
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
God more or less rectifies the depraved nature consequent
on Adam's sin, and that previous to this influence
of the Spirit, every voluntary act is <q>sin, and
only sin.</q><note place='foot'>The Arminians hold that Christ's death has purchased the return
of God's Spirit withdrawn for Adam's sin, and that owing to this aid,
man has some power to obey God previous to regeneration, so that all
the doings of the unregenerate are not sin.</note>
</p>

<p>
Common sense teaches that the commencement of
<q>a new life</q> consists, not in the change of the nature
of man, but in the commencement of a <emph>ruling purpose</emph>
to obey all the laws of God, which purpose may be
an unconscious, gradual process by educational training,
or it may be an instantaneous and conscious act.
Augustinianism teaches that <q>regeneration</q> or the
<q>new birth</q> consists in the re-creation or change of
the nature of mind, so as, more or less, to remedy the
depravity consequent on Adam's sin.
</p>

<p>
Common sense teaches that every volition of every
mind, which in act and intention is conformed to the
laws of rectitude, is truly virtuous in every proper
use of the term, without any reference to the question
either of a ruling purpose or a change of nature. Augustinianism
teaches that every volition of every mind
is sin, and only sin, previous to the act of regeneration
accomplished by the Spirit of God.<note place='foot'>Those new school Calvinists, who teach that regeneration consists
in the formation of a ruling purpose by man himself, hold that this
never takes place until the Spirit of God more or less rectifies the depraved
nature consequent on Adam's sin, and that previous to regeneration
every moral act of every mind is <q>sin, and only sin.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
To illustrate the above by examples, suppose that
a child is trained to deny itself, to relieve suffering, or
to make others happy. In its earlier efforts this is very
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
difficult, though by practice the principle of habit renders
it more and more easy. Common sense teaches
that the first act of self-denial for the best good of
others, in which the aim or intention is to do right,
is truly virtuous. For the thing done is right, and
the motive or intention is right. But Augustinianism
says no; such an act is <q>sin, and only sin,</q> previous
to regeneration, though it is true virtue after
regeneration.
</p>

<p>
Again, a young man is trained to abhor meanness
and deceit and to suffer any thing rather than
to violate his plighted faith. He is brought into
an extremity where, by a false statement, he can
escape poverty and disgrace to himself and his family.
He sacrifices all rather than to violate his word
and honor.
</p>

<p>
If he is not a regenerate man, Augustinianism says
this act is not truly virtuous, but is <q>sin, and only
sin.</q> Common sense says, it is a virtuous act in every
sense of the term as used among men.
</p>

<p>
We have shown by quotations that Augustinian
theologians teach that man's nature is the only guide
to the nature of God, and, as his work and image, is
perfect in construction. At the same time they teach
that man's nature is so totally depraved that it never
acts morally right, in a single instance, until it is regenerated
by God, and that all sin is the natural result
of this depravity of nature.
</p>

<p>
In consequence of this contradictory starting-point,
they proceed to other contradictory instruction. For
example, in the education of very young children
most theologians, of whatever school, teach them that
to speak the truth, to obey parents, to deny one's self
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
for the good of others, is right, good and virtuous.
They teach that when little children act thus, before
regeneration, they not only act virtuously, but
that God approves and loves them for it. In doing
this, they use the words <emph>good</emph>, <emph>right</emph> and <emph>virtuous</emph>,
in the ordinary sense in which men understand these
terms.
</p>

<p>
But at the same time, the same theologians are teaching
from the pulpit and the press, that every voluntary
act of every child is <q>sin, and only sin,</q> previous to
regeneration; that there is no good, right and virtuous
act in an unregenerated mind, and that God
feels no approbation or complacency in such acts or
the unregenerated as the above, which are called
virtuous, but are really sin.
</p>

<p>
It is manifest that the educational training of the
young must be radically diverse just in proportion as
one or the other of these two systems prevails.
</p>

<p>
On the Augustinian theory, there is no hope of any
right moral action, or truly virtuous conduct, until
the depraved nature transmitted from Adam is regenerated.
On the common-sense theory, every attempt
of a parent or educator, and every effort of a child to
secure what is best and right with the intention thus to
secure it, is truly virtuous, and every repetition is valuable
as tending to secure virtuous habits and character.
</p>

<p>
On the Augustinian theory, religious instruction is
only an appointed mode by which God chooses to regenerate
a depraved nature. It is a process for securing
a new nature from God. On the common-sense
theory, religious training is a process for securing the
development and right action of mind by the influences
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
of knowledge, training and motives, and without
any change of its nature.
</p>

<p>
It is also clear that these two systems must be very
diverse in reference to the interpretations of the Creator's
will as gained by reason or by revelations from
God.
</p>

<p>
On the Augustinian theory, mind is so totally depraved
as to be incapable of interpreting correctly,
either the natural teachings of reason and experience,
or the recorded revelations from God. Owing to this,
<emph>authorized interpreters</emph> of God's will are indispensable.
This makes the whole human race dependent on a
class of men authorized by God to interpret his natural
laws and revealed will.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, the common-sense theory claims
that every mind, in proportion as its powers are cultivated
and developed, has the means of discovering
the end for which all things are created, and of interpreting
the teachings of reason and experience, and
also of interpreting any revealed records of God's
will.
</p>

<p>
It thus appears that theologians and creeds that
adopt the Augustinian theory contradict themselves
mainly in these two points:
</p>

<p>
First, they teach that man's nature <emph>is</emph> depraved and
that it is <emph>not</emph> depraved.
</p>

<p>
Next, that previous to regeneration, men do not
perform any truly virtuous acts, and yet that while
unregenerated they do perform such acts.
</p>

<p>
The quotation from creeds and theologians, in preceding
chapters, is proof that they teach that man's
nature is thus depraved, and that previous to regeneration
he never performs a single truly virtuous act.
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
This and the preceding chapter present some of the
evidence that they teach the opposite.
</p>

<p>
The following is submitted as still further evidence
of such contradictions.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, it is allowed by all, that the Augustinian
creeds and theologians teach that man, as <emph>a
race</emph>, including every individual, has a depraved <emph>nature</emph>.
The question, then, all turns on the meaning of
the word <emph>nature</emph>, and whether they affirm its depravity
<emph>in the same sense</emph> as they affirm that in nature man is
the living image of the living God and our only guide
to a knowledge of him.
</p>

<p>
It is claimed that they do use the word <emph>nature</emph> in
one and the same sense when they affirm that man's
nature <emph>is</emph> and <emph>is not</emph> depraved. In proof of this we
must resort to our lexicographers who have collected
the various senses in which mankind use the word
<emph>nature</emph>. And here we must again recognize the fact
that the true meaning of every word is settled simply
by ascertaining <emph>what meaning men attach to it when they
use it</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In examining our dictionaries, we shall find that
the word <emph>nature</emph> is used sometimes to signify every
thing that God has created; as when it is said, <q>all
nature speaks its Maker's praise.</q> Sometimes, by a
figurative use, the Author of all things is called Nature,
as when it is said that <q>Nature paints the flowers
and spreads her repasts.</q>
</p>

<p>
No one will claim that either of these is the sense
in which the word is used in reference to the nature
of the mind of man as a race.
</p>

<p>
The leading and primary signification of the word
<emph>nature</emph> is that which is intended and understood when
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
we say that <q>the <emph>nature</emph> of a design or construction
is proof of the character and intention of the author.</q>
It is in this sense that men use the word when
they speak of the nature of animals, the nature of
trees, and the nature of the soul.
</p>

<p>
In this use, it has but one signification, and that is,
<emph>those qualities, powers and faculties which are discovered
by experience and observation</emph>. Or in other words, when
we discover the qualities of a thing, how it acts, and
how it is acted upon, we learn its <emph>nature</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In regard to all other existences except mind, the
only mode of discovering <emph>their nature</emph> is to ascertain
by experience and observation how they <emph>invariably</emph>
appear and act. Thus we decide that it is the nature
of water to run down hill by finding that it <emph>invariably</emph>
does so; and that it is the nature of smoke to rise in
the atmosphere by observing that it <emph>invariably</emph> ascends.
</p>

<p>
Owing to this, mankind often use the word <emph>nature</emph>
as signifying <emph>that which is according to ordinary experience</emph>.
That is to say, the same word is used to express
the <emph>qualities and powers</emph> of things, and also to express
that <emph>invariable experience</emph> by which we learn these
qualities and powers. What is according to our ordinary
experience we say is according to nature, and
what is contrary to ordinary experience is contrary to
nature.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is according to nature for water to run down
hill, and it is contrary to nature for it to run up hill.
</p>

<p>
It is mind, in distinction from matter, which has
the power of <emph>willing</emph>, and this is a power which never
is exercised <emph>invariably</emph> one way or another.
</p>

<p>
But theologians have practiced this fallacy on themselves
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
and others. They first assume, what is contrary
to fact, that mind <emph>invariably</emph> chooses one way, and that
is <emph>wrong</emph>, from birth to regeneration. This being assumed
without proof, they claim that the <emph>nature</emph> of the
human mind is thus proved to be depraved, and totally
so.
</p>

<p>
Having thus, as they imagine, established its depraved
voluntary nature, they claim that, like all
other things, the mind <emph>must act according to its nature</emph>,
which, being wholly depraved, all its moral acts are
consequently depraved.
</p>

<p>
This is what logicians call <emph>arguing in a circle</emph>; <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
they prove that it acts <emph>invariably</emph> wrong because it is
totally depraved, and it is totally depraved because it
acts <emph>invariably</emph> wrong.
</p>

<p>
But common sense denies the starting assumption;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the <emph>invariably</emph> wrong volitions of every mind from
birth to regeneration. On the contrary, it is claimed
that every choice which secures enjoyment without
violating law, is right, and that whenever a mind
chooses what is right, with the intention to act right,
the choice is a truly virtuous act, and that all men
make such choices very often before regeneration.
</p>

<p>
Whatever is according to ordinary experience in
the qualities and action of mind, is said to be according
to its nature. It is according to the nature of
mind, then, sometimes to choose what is good, right
and virtuous, and at other times to choose what is
evil and wrong, according to its knowledge, temptations
and habits. Such a case never was known as a
mind that <emph>invariably</emph> chose wrong.
</p>

<p>
In view of the preceding, it is maintained that the
word <emph>nature</emph>, as applied to mind, as settled by lexicographers,
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
is always used to signify the same as its <emph>constitutional
powers and faculties</emph>, and that this is the sense
in which it is employed when we say <q>the <emph>nature</emph> of a
construction or design is proof of the character and intention
of the author.</q>
</p>

<p>
We are now prepared to show that theologians use
the word nature in this same sense when they affirm
that it is totally depraved, and when, at the same time,
they teach that it is the image of God, and our only
guide to his nature and character.
</p>

<p>
We shall first present the evidence that they use
the word in this sense, when they teach that every
human mind is so depraved in nature that from birth
to regeneration every moral act is sin, and only sin.
</p>

<p>
The first item of evidence is the fact that all the
other meanings of the word, in our dictionaries, except
this, can be shown to be <emph>not</emph> the ones in which
theologians use the word in reference to men as a race,
so that this use is the only one remaining. They must
use it in this sense, as the only one left, all others being
necessarily excluded.
</p>

<p>
Again, the mode by which they attempt to <emph>prove</emph> that
man has a depraved nature, shows that they use the word
in this sense. For they exhibit the <emph>wrong action</emph>, or sinful
feelings and conduct of the race, as the chief proof.
Their argument is this: the <emph>nature</emph> of a thing is proved
by its qualities, how it acts, and how it is acted upon.
The human mind <emph>invariably</emph> acts depraved, therefore
its nature is depraved. No one will deny that theologians
always present the wicked feelings and conduct
of children and of men as the proofs of a depraved
nature.
</p>

<p>
It is true, that in doing this they misstate facts, and
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
maintain that <emph>all</emph> the actions of men are sin, and only
sin. This contradicts experience and common sense,
which affirm that the human mind sometimes acts
right and sometimes wrong, from the first; showing
that the nature of mind is such that it naturally acts
right as well as wrong. But this attempt proves that
they used the word in the sense here stated.
</p>

<p>
Again: that theologians use the word in this sense,
is manifest from their attempts to relieve the character
of God from the charge of being <q>the author of
sin.</q> They can not deny that the nature of a contrivance
proves the character and intention of the author,
and that, if God is the author of man's depravity
by a wrong <emph>construction</emph> or <emph>nature</emph> of mind, it would be
proof that he is the author of all the sin resulting from
it, and thus a depraved character.
</p>

<p>
Instead of denying this use of the term, they allow
it, and then try to make man himself the author of
this depraved nature, either <emph>by</emph>, or <emph>in</emph>, or <emph>before</emph> Adam.
That is, they allow that man's mind <emph>is</emph> wrong in construction,
but claim that he himself is the author of
this wrong.
</p>

<p>
Again: that theologians use the word nature in
this sense, is proved by their description of the depravity
intended by them. When they are urged to
point out what the depraved nature of man consists
in, they always state something which shows it to be
wrong in <emph>construction</emph>, and which is exhibited in the
wrong <emph>action</emph> of mind.
</p>

<p>
There are these following methods of describing
this depravity, viz.:
</p>

<p>
1. It is called a <emph>bias</emph>, <emph>propensity</emph>, or <emph>inclination</emph> to sin.
</p>

<p>
2. It is called an <emph>unbalanced</emph> state of the faculties.
</p>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<p>
3. It is called a <emph>habit</emph> of sinning formed in a pre-existent
state.
</p>

<p>
4. It is called a wrong <emph>combination</emph>, or <emph>proportion</emph>,
in the mental faculties.
</p>

<p>
5. It is called a state resulting from the <emph>deprivation</emph>
of God's Spirit.
</p>

<p>
It will now be shown that each and all of these
equally involve the idea of that malformation or
wrong construction which proves its author depraved.
</p>

<p>
The first is the most common method. On this
view, it is claimed that the minds of angels and of
Adam were constructed with such a <emph>bias</emph> or tendency
to good as secured their perfect action for a given
period. The mind of man, on the contrary, begins
existence here so constructed that it has a contrary
<emph>bias</emph> to evil; so that it never, in a single instance,
chooses right till regenerated.
</p>

<p>
The angels and Adam had a <emph>holy nature</emph>, meaning a
<emph>bias</emph>, which God created. Mankind have a contrary
bias, which is a <emph>depraved nature</emph>, and of this, man is the
author, either <emph>in</emph>, or <emph>by</emph>, or <emph>before</emph> Adam. And they
all allow, that if God had created this depraved bias, or
depraved nature, he would be <q>the author of sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
The second mode is, the claim that man's depravity
consists in an <emph>unbalanced state</emph> of his faculties or
propensities. The angels and Adam were created by
God with the proper balance, and this is the holy nature
made by God. Man is born with an unbalanced
state of the faculties, and this was created by man
himself, either <emph>by</emph>, or <emph>in</emph>, or <emph>before</emph> Adam. Now the
balance of the faculties is as much a part of the construction
of mind as any thing else, and if God created
this depraved, he is proved to be depraved.
</p>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<p>
The third mode is, the claim that the depravity of
man's mind consists in a <emph>habit of sinning</emph>. On this
view, God created man's mind aright, in all respects,
in a preëxistent state. In this normal condition of
mind, every propensity was toward not only <emph>good</emph>, but
to the <emph>best</emph> good, while there was sufficient <emph>knowledge</emph>
of right created also, to save from all mistakes of judgment
as to what is best and right. In this perfect state
<emph>some</emph> minds began to sin, and thus formed a habit of
sinning, and were then sent into this world to be reformed.
</p>

<p>
Here it is plain, that the depravity intended is depravity
of construction. For <emph>habit</emph>, as men use the
term, expresses the fact that repetition in the use of
any faculty <emph>increases its power</emph>. It is a change in the
constitutional <emph>construction</emph> of mind induced by use.
For example, a child has little constitutional power
of mind to reason or to calculate figures. By use,
this deficiency of construction is modified.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Habit</emph>, then, modifies the constitutional organization
of mind.
</p>

<p>
This mode of describing the depravity of mind
teaches the misconstruction of constitutional organization
as much as all the others, but it furnishes another
mode by which it was induced, so as to make man the
author in a way that is comprehensible, and not absurd.<note place='foot'><ref target='Note_E'>Note E</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fourth mode is the claim that the depravity of
the human mind consists in the <emph>disparities, or varieties,
of constitutional organization</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that such disparities, as parts of
a vast system in which the best good of the whole is
the best good of each part, are indispensable to the
perfect construction of mind in relation to that system.
</p>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<p>
But the depravity claimed is, that which is common
to <emph>every</emph> mind, and is so total that not a single mind,
however highly endowed, ever, even in one case, acts
virtuously till regenerated. Thus the best in mental
construction are as totally depraved as the worst. At
the same time, it is clear that it is constitutional malformation
that is taught, and nothing else.
</p>

<p>
The fifth mode of describing the depravity of mind
is that it consists in the <emph>deprivation</emph> of God's Spirit.
</p>

<p>
The result of this deprivation is thus described by
Dr. Hodge, of the Princeton Calvinist school of divines:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>In consequence of this withdrawal we begin to exist in moral
darkness, <emph>destitute of a disposition</emph> to delight in God.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Arminius, the chief theologian of the Methodists,
describes it thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The will of man, with respect to the <emph>true good</emph>, is not only
wounded, bruised, inferior, crooked and attenuated, but is likewise
captivated, destroyed and lost; and has <emph>no powers whatever</emph>,
except such as are excited by grace.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus the presence of God's Spirit in Adam's mind,
according to Dr. Hodge, insured a <q>disposition</q> to delight
in God, which was lost by its withdrawal. According
to Arminius, this withdrawal so affected the
whole race, that <q>in respect to the <emph>true good</emph></q> the will
of man has <emph>no powers whatever</emph>, except such as are excited
by grace&mdash;that is, by a measured return of
God's Spirit, withdrawn for Adam's sin, which return
was purchased by Christ's death.
</p>

<p>
It is clear, that it is the powers and faculties of mind
that are meant here, in this explanation of the depravity
of man's nature.
</p>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<p>
Thus it is shown that every attempt to explain what
depravity consists in, by theologians, results in their
teaching a <emph>constitutional malformation</emph>, which proves
the author of the construction to be depraved.
</p>

<p>
We will now present the evidence, that theologians
contradict themselves, and deny that they use the word
<emph>nature</emph> in the sense of constitutional organization or
construction, and maintain that they use it in some
other sense.
</p>

<p>
In all creeds and all theological teachings, the authors
expressly disclaim that they maintain any thing
which makes God <q>the author of sin.</q> And they allow,
that making God the creator of a depraved nature,
would make him the author of sin. Therefore, to
escape the difficulty, they claim that God is the author
of one nature, which is perfect and in his own image,
and that there is <emph>another</emph> nature which man himself
made, either <emph>by</emph>, or <emph>in</emph>, or <emph>before</emph> Adam, which is depraved.
Then when they are driven to identify the
nature that God made and the nature that man made,
they are again at fault. Man really has but one nature,
and that is the nature which is discovered by his
qualities and actions, as learned by experience. There
is no other nature conceivable, and no other idea that
men ever attach to the word when applied to the mind
or soul of man. Therefore, theologians really do use
it in the sense which they deny, for there is no other.
</p>

<p>
Again, theologians deny that they teach <q>physical
depravity</q> and <q>physical regeneration,</q> and the only
intelligible sense of this disclaimer is, that they do not
teach depravity of construction and the reformation of
this depravity of construction. But, as before shown,
when they describe the depravity and regeneration,
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
they make out what actually is physical depravity and
physical regeneration, and nothing else.
</p>

<p>
Again, when they attempt to describe what they
mean, one class of theologians&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, new school Calvinists&mdash;teach
that the whole depravity consists in a
want of <q><emph>right willing</emph>.</q> And this is exactly what the
common-sense system teaches&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that the depravity
of man is in the wrong <emph>action</emph> and not in the wrong
<emph>construction</emph> of mind. And yet when they are charged
with holding the Pelagian doctrine of perfect mental
construction, they deny it, and say they teach depravity
of nature.
</p>

<p>
As an example of this, is presented the following
extract from the writings of Dr. Bennet Tyler, the
president of a theological seminary established to sustain
the New England theology of the President Edwards'
type, in opposition to the supposed Pelagian
innovations of the New Haven theologians:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>God has endowed you with understanding to perceive the rule
of duty, with conscience to feel obligation, and with <emph>will</emph> to choose
between good and evil. Possessing these powers, you are complete
moral agents, and have <emph>all</emph> the ability to obey the commands
of God that you ever will have, or ever <emph>can</emph> have&mdash;we do not
mean that all the powers and faculties of his (man's) soul are so
impaired that he <emph>could not</emph> do his duty if he would, but that he
<emph>will</emph> not do his duty when he can.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In reading the above, one would suppose that there
was nothing wrong at all in the construction of the
human mind, and that the whole difficulty consisted
in <emph>not willing</emph> aright&mdash;that is, that the depravity is not
in a wrong <emph>nature</emph>, but in the wrong <emph>action</emph> of a perfect
nature. And yet, at the time of this writing, the author
was the leader of an effort to oppose this very
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
doctrine, which was supposed to be taught by the New
Haven divines.
</p>

<p>
In a recent work by the chief theological teacher of
the leading Baptist Seminary,<note place='foot'><q>State of the Impenitent Dead,</q> by Alvah Hovey, D.D.</note> we find similar contradictory
statements. He thus writes:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q><emph>Regeneration</emph> is not only characterized by the sacred writers as
a <emph>creative act</emph>, by which the subject of it becomes a new creature
in Christ Jesus, and a generation from above, by which the soul is
brought into new spiritual life; but also a washing, a bathing, effected
by the Holy Ghost, by which the polluted soul is cleansed;
as an illumination, by which it is filled with the knowledge of
God, and qualified to appreciate spiritual things. The eye of conscience
is cleared, the desires and affections are renewed and flow
into new channels, and the selfish views, prejudices and motives,
which formerly reigned in the soul, are superseded by faith, love
and hope, resting in Christ, and leading to every good work. The
<emph>entire spirit</emph> is readjusted morally, its aspirations, tendencies and
relations to God are rectified, and it enters, so to speak, upon a
new life.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In this passage, regeneration is called <q>a creative
act</q> changing the <emph>conscience</emph>, the <emph>desires</emph>, the <emph>views</emph>,
the <emph>prejudices</emph> and the <emph>motives</emph>&mdash;so that <q><emph>the entire spirit</emph>
is <emph>readjusted</emph>,</q> and all its <q>aspirations, tendencies and
relations to God are rectified.</q> It is not in the power
of language to express <emph>a change</emph> in the <emph>faculties</emph> and
<emph>constitutional elements of mind</emph> more entirely than this;
and yet the very next paragraph reads thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>But all this pertains to the moral condition of the soul, affording
<emph>no evidence that its essence has been changed; that any faculty
or constitutive element has been added, any fresh vigor or new principle
of existence infused</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<p>
But the most remarkable illustration of self-contradiction
among theologians, involved in every attempt
to maintain a depraved nature consequent on
Adam's sin, is found in the teachings of Dr. Taylor,
the leader of the New Haven school of divines.
</p>

<p>
In his <hi rend='italic'>Concio ad Clerum</hi>, in 1828, one aim probably
was, to meet the charges against himself, of teaching
the Pelagian tenet, that man's depravity consists, not
in nature, but in action. In reference to this he writes
thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Men are entirely depraved by <emph>nature</emph>. I do not thereby mean
that their nature is itself sinful, nor that their nature is the physical
or efficient cause of their sinning; but I mean that their nature
is the <emph>occasion</emph> or <emph>reason</emph> of their sinning&mdash;that such is their
nature, that in all the appropriate circumstances of their being
they will <emph>sin</emph> and <emph>only sin</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Again&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It is important to say that sin is by nature, owing to propensities
to inferior good, with a difference between Adam's mind
and ours&mdash;though we can not assert that, in which this difference
may consist;&mdash;that our propensities are the same in <emph>kind</emph>, though
different in <emph>degree</emph> from those of Adam; that perhaps this distinction
may consist in mental differences, or in superior tendencies,
compared with Adam's to natural good, and less tendency to the
highest good.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In the above extract, it is as clear as language can
make it, that Dr. Taylor taught, in 1828, that in men
sin <emph>by nature</emph> is owing to propensities to inferior good,
which are <q>different from Adam's,</q> who was created
perfect, and that this is <q>the occasion or reason</q> of
their sinning, and that <q>such is <emph>their nature</emph>, that in all
appropriate circumstances of their being, they <emph>will sin,
and only sin</emph>.</q> This must mean the <emph>construction</emph> of
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
mind. He does not claim to describe, certainly, what
this difference is between the nature of Adam and
that of his descendants; but he maintains that while
Adam's nature was not so created by God at first, the
nature of <emph>all</emph> his descendants is so depraved, that, as
the result, they <q>sin, and only sin,</q> till regenerated.
</p>

<p>
But, in contradiction to this, is presented the extract
below, sent by Dr. Taylor to the author, in a letter in
which he was attempting to show that he did not
teach the depravity of man in his <emph>constitutional</emph> faculties.
And he claims that what he thus writes is
what he has <q><emph>always</emph> taught:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>I have <emph>always taught</emph> that man, after the fall of Adam, was as
truly created in God's image as was Adam; that Christ was tempted
in <emph>all</emph> points like as we are; that the stronger are our inferior
propensities, if we govern them, as we can, by the morally right
act of the will, the greater is the moral excellence of the act. I
<emph>do not</emph> maintain that man has full power to <emph>change</emph> his depraved
nature without divine aid&mdash;for I have never supposed that he has
a depraved nature in <hi rend='smallcaps'>any</hi> sense, or a corrupt nature, much less a
sinful nature, <emph>to be</emph> changed; but rather, that <emph>in nature</emph> he is like
God. In discussions I have always opposed the use of language
by your father and Mr. Barnes, of a <emph>corrupt nature not sinful</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Now it is not possible to make these two extracts
any thing other than exact contradictions. For in one
he teaches that men are so totally depraved <emph>in nature</emph>,
that <q>in all the appropriate circumstances of their being
they will <emph>sin, and only sin</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the other, he says of man, <q>I have never supposed
that he has a depraved nature, <emph>in any sense</emph>, or
a corrupt nature, much less a sinful nature, to be
changed; but rather that <emph>in nature</emph> he is like God.</q>
</p>

<p>
If it is asked, <q>How is it possible that a man, at
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
once so honest and so acute, can thus contradict himself
and not perceive it?</q> it may be replied, that he
has done it no more than does every other theologian
and every creed that teaches at once, that the <emph>nature</emph>
of man is so depraved at birth that every moral act is
sin, and only sin, till regeneration&mdash;and yet, that God,
the Creator of all minds, is not the author of the sin
resulting from such a depraved nature.
</p>

<p>
And theologians are not peculiar in self-contradictions.
<emph>Every error is a contradiction to some principle
of common sense.</emph> Thus it is a fact, that, as all men believe
and maintain, by a necessity of nature, the principles
of common sense, every <emph>false</emph> principle or error
which they defend, is a flat contradiction to some of
their other declarations on other occasions. Meantime,
it is the great mission of all free and fair <emph>discussion</emph>
to bring men to see their own inconsistencies,
and to forsake all which are shown to be <emph>contrary to
reason and common sense</emph>.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXIII. The Augustinian Theory Not In The Bible.</head>

<p>
In the preceding chapters it is shown that theological
creeds and teachings maintain the common-sense
system, and at the same time the contradictory Augustinian
system. In other words, it is shown that
the Augustinian theologians contradict at once our
common sense, our moral sense, and themselves.
</p>

<p>
It will next be shown that the Augustinian theory
<emph>is not contained in the Bible</emph>, and that theologians conflict
with each other in regard to this point also.
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
There is <emph>only one</emph> passage in the Bible which was
ever claimed by <emph>any</emph> one as teaching a depraved nature
<emph>consequent on Adam's sin</emph>. That passage is Romans
v., from the 12th to the 19th verse:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
12 Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned:
</p>

<p>
13 For until the law, sin was in the world; but sin is not imputed
when there is no law.
</p>

<p>
14 Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression,
who is the figure of him that was to come.
</p>

<p>
15 But not as the offense, so also is the free gift. For if through
the offense of one many be dead, much more the grace of God,
and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath
abounded unto many.
</p>

<p>
16 And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift. For
the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of
many offenses unto justification.
</p>

<p>
17 For if by one man's offense death reigned by one; much
more they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
18 Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment came upon all
men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the
free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.
</p>

<p>
19 For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In this passage these things are taught:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
1. By one man sin entered and death by sin, and so [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, by
one man] death passed on all men, <emph>for that all have sinned</emph>.&mdash;Verses
12, 13, 14.
</p>

<p>
2. Through the offense of one many <emph>have died</emph>.&mdash;Verse 15.
</p>

<p>
3. The judgment was by one to condemnation.&mdash;Verse 16.
</p>

<p>
4. By one man's offense <emph>death</emph> reigned by one.&mdash;Verse 17.
</p>

<p>
5. By the offense of one, judgment came on all to condemnation.&mdash;Verse
18.
</p>

<p>
6. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.&mdash;V. 19.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
There are three modes of interpreting this passage,
and the question all turns on whether the <emph>death</emph> spoken
of is <emph>natural</emph> death or <emph>spiritual</emph>.
</p>

<div>
<head>Interpretation of the Apostolic Age.</head>

<p>
The first interpretation is that of the Apostolic age
and onward to the time of Augustine. It is briefly
this:
</p>

<p>
Adam is a type of Christ, and as by Adam's sin
natural death came on all who are his <emph>natural children</emph>,
(for they all, like Adam, have <emph>sinned</emph> and suffer
death as the consequence,) so by one man, Christ, spiritual
life comes to all who are Christ's <emph>spiritual children</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This simply teaches that Adam as the head of a sinning
race, who suffer death in consequence of his sin
and their own, is an emblem or type of Christ, the
head of a holy family, who by him receive spiritual
life. Condemnation and natural death come from sinning,
both to Adam and to all the children brought
into being by him. Justification and spiritual life
come from Christ to all whom he has caused to become
his spiritual children.
</p>

<p>
For abundant proof that this was the interpretation
of this passage, from the apostles to the time of Augustine,
the author refers to Dr. E. Beecher's <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of
Ages</hi>, book v., chapter 2.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Augustinian Interpretation.</head>

<p>
The Augustinian interpretation is this: The sin of
Adam caused a <emph>depraved nature</emph> and consequent spiritual
death to all his descendants. So also the obedience
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
and death of Christ have purchased or caused a <emph>holy
nature</emph> and spiritual life to all who are regenerated.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Princeton Interpretation.</head>

<p>
It has been shown that the Princeton theologians
teach, that though all men did not sin <emph>in</emph> Adam, or
sin at all, before they were born, yet God <emph>imputes</emph>
Adam's sin to them, and <emph>regards</emph> and <emph>treats</emph> them <emph>as if</emph>
they had committed it.
</p>

<p>
Their interpretation of this passage then is briefly this:
</p>

<p>
As by, or on account of, Adam's sin a <emph>condemning
sentence</emph> came on all men, so by Christ's obedience a
<emph>sentence of acquittal</emph> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, justification) came on all who
are regenerated.
</p>

<p>
According to these divines, verse 12 does not refer
to a depraved <emph>nature</emph> nor to <emph>actual sin</emph>, but only to the
fact that all suffer the penalty for Adam's sin through
all time and eternity, unless they are regenerated. The
Princeton school of divines are the most strongly Calvinistic
in maintaining the total depravity of man and
his entire inability to perform any truly virtuous act
previous to regeneration.
</p>

<p>
Here, then, we have these results:
</p>

<p>
The Augustinian theory of <emph>the depraved nature</emph> of
man, consequent on Adam's sin, contradicts the common
sense and moral sense of mankind, contradicts
the creeds and teachings that contain it, and is not
taught in the chief passage in the Bible claimed as
teaching it, as interpreted by the whole Christian
world in the first four centuries, and by a large body
of Calvinistic divines who teach total depravity at the
present time.
</p>

<p>
Whoever, then, denies that this passage of the Bible
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
teaches this doctrine is sustained by the whole
Church of the Apostolic ages and by a great body of
the highest Calvinistic churches at this day.
</p>

<p>
There are some other passages that may be referred
to as relating to this subject. The first is Romans,
chapter ii., 6 to 16:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Who will render to every man according to his deeds: to
them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory,
and honor, and immortality; eternal life: but unto them that are
contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul
of man that doeth evil; of the Jew first and also of the Gentile;
but glory, honor, and peace to every man that worketh good; to
the Jew first, and also to the Gentile; for there is no respect of
persons with God. For as many as have sinned without law, shall
also perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the law
shall be judged by the law; (for not the hearers of the law are just
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. For when
<emph>the Gentiles, which have not the law</emph>, do <emph>by nature</emph> the things contained
in the law, these having not the law, are a law unto themselves,
which show the work of the law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing, or else excusing one another;) in the day when
God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to
my gospel.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Taken in its connection, the word <emph>nature</emph>, as used
in this passage, evidently is used in its primary and
chief meaning, to signify the constitutional powers or
organization of mind. <q>The work of the law written
in their hearts,</q> <q>their conscience also bearing witness;</q>
these are what are referred to when it is said,
<q>the Gentiles do <emph>by nature</emph> the things contained in the
law.</q> And it is <emph>doing</emph> those things which secures <q>glory,
honor and peace</q>&mdash;<q>to the Jew first, and <emph>also to the
Gentile</emph>.</q>
</p>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<p>
Another passage is Ephesians, ii., 1-3:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>And you hath he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and
sins; wherein in time past ye walked according to the course of this
world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit
that now worketh in the children of disobedience: among whom
also we all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were
<emph>by nature</emph> the children of wrath, even as others.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In this passage the apostle is addressing those who
in a succeeding verse are told, <q>remember that ye
being in times past <emph>Gentiles</emph> in the flesh:</q> this being
so, they are those who, the same writer says, <q>do <emph>by
nature</emph> the things contained in the law.</q>
</p>

<p>
The signification of nature in this passage must be
<emph>that which is according to ordinary experience</emph>. That is,
<emph>according to ordinary experience</emph> mankind <q>are children
of wrath,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, subject to the wrathful penalties of disobedience
to the laws of God. But by the influences
brought by Christ, <q>a new life</q> is secured, which is
a life of intelligent and <emph>voluntary</emph> obedience to law, an
obedience which the natural penalties of law could not
secure, but which the <emph>knowledge</emph> and <emph>love</emph> of God, as
manifested by Christ, do secure.
</p>

<p>
One other text merits attention: 1 Corinthians, chapter
ii., 14. <q>But the <emph>natural</emph> man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned.</q>
</p>

<p>
In this passage the <q><emph>natural</emph> man</q> must signify
<q>man as he is found in our ordinary experience.</q>
The idea evidently intended, is that mankind, as a
race, do not understand or obey the truth as it is
taught by Christ and the Spirit of God. The fact is
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
affirmed that without Christ and the divine Spirit to
aid, man as a race does not come to such knowledge of
and obedience to the laws of God as secures eternal life.
</p>

<p>
In reference to most other texts quoted to prove
a depraved <emph>nature</emph>, it will be found that they simply
affirm depraved <emph>action</emph>. Men, in the Bible, are described
as wrong-<emph>doers</emph> by their own wrong <emph>willing or
choice</emph> and not by a depraved <emph>nature</emph>. Sometimes they
are said to choose wrong and sometimes right, and
their wrong willing no more proves a depraved nature
than the right willing proves a holy nature.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXIV. A Reliable Revelation From The Creator Impossible
If It Contains The Augustinian Theory.</head>

<p>
The object aimed at in this chapter demands attention
to the following preliminaries.
</p>

<p>
Before we can gain a reliable revelation from our
Creator, we are obliged to establish the truth that there
is such a Creator. Our only mode of doing this is by
the method already set forth in chapter 10, and for
which we are dependent on our reason or common
sense.
</p>

<p>
Having, by the aid of reason, arrived at a knowledge
of the existence and character of the Creator, we
next inquire as to the mode by which we can receive
direct revelations from him.
</p>

<p>
Here we find that we are again wholly dependent
on reason or common sense. The principle on which
we alone rely for revelations from God is this:
</p>

<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A change in the established order of nature
surpassing human power, is evidence of a supernatural
agency that is sanctioned by the Author
of the Laws of Nature.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The conviction of the wisdom and power of the
Author of this vast and wonderful frame around us is
such that, whatever changes may occur in its established
order, must be felt to be by his permission.
</p>

<p>
To illustrate this, suppose a man appeared, claiming
to be a teacher sent from God. In proof of this, he
commands a mountain to be uptorn and thrown into
the sea. Now, if this phenomenon should follow his
command, it would be impossible for any who witnessed
it, to refrain from believing that the Author of
Nature performed this miracle to attest the authority
of his messenger.
</p>

<p>
In order to insure this belief in the interference of
the Creator, there must be full evidence that there
can be no deception, and that the miraculous performance
is entirely beyond human power and skill.
Men always talk and act on the assumption that <emph>such</emph>
miracles are from God, and all rational minds so regard
them.
</p>

<p>
We have shown that the chief cause of a wrong action
of mind, is that it commences existence in perfect
ignorance, while all those causes which experience
shows to be indispensable to its right action, to a
greater or less degree are wanting.
</p>

<p>
The grand want of our race is <emph>perfect educators</emph> to
train new-born minds, who are <emph>infallible teachers of
what is right and true</emph>.
</p>

<p>
We have presented the evidence gained by reason
and experience that the Creator is perfect in mental
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
constitution, and that he always has acted right, and
always will thus act. This being granted, we infer
that he always has done <emph>the best that is possible</emph> for the
highest good of his creatures in this world, and that
he always will continue to do so.
</p>

<p>
We proceed to inquire in regard to what would be
the best that is possible to be done for us in this state
of being, <emph>so far as we can conceive</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Inasmuch as the great cause of the wrong action of
mind is the ignorance and imperfection of those who
are its educators in the beginning of its existence, we
should infer that the best possible thing to be done for
our race, would be to provide some <emph>perfect and infallible
teacher</emph> to instruct those who are to educate mind.
This being granted, then all would concede that the
Creator himself would be our best teacher, and that,
if he would come to us himself in a visible form, to
instruct the educators of mind in all they need to
know, for themselves and for the new-born minds
committed to their care, it would be the best thing
we can conceive of for the highest good of our race.
</p>

<p>
We next inquire as to the best conceivable mode
by which the Creator can manifest himself so as to
secure credence.
</p>

<p>
To decide this, let each one suppose the case his
own. Let a man make his appearance claiming to be
the Creator. We can perceive that his mere word
would never command the confidence of intelligent
practical men. Thousands of impostors have appeared
and made such claims, deceiving the weak and
ignorant and disgusting the wise.
</p>

<p>
A person with such claims, were he ever so benevolent
and intelligent, but having had no other evidence
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
than his word to support them, would, by sensible persons,
be regarded as the victim of some mental hallucination.
</p>

<p>
But suppose that a person claiming to be the Creator
of all things, or to be a messenger from him,
should attest his claim by shaking the earth, or turning
back the floods of the ocean, it would be impossible
for any man to witness these miracles without
believing, that the Author of all things thus attested
his own presence or the authority of his messenger.
We have shown that the very organization of mind
would necessarily force such a belief on all sane minds.
</p>

<p>
One other method would be as effective. Should
this person predict events so improbable and so beyond
all human intelligence, as to be equivalent to an
equal interruption of experience as to the laws of mind,
as time developed the fulfillment of these predictions,
the same belief would be induced in the authority of
the person thus supernaturally endowed.
</p>

<p>
In the case of miracles, the evidence would be immediate
and most powerful in its inception. In the
case of prophecy, the power of the evidence would
increase with time.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Miracles and prophecy</emph>, then, are the <emph>only</emph> methods that
we can conceive of, that would, as our minds are now
constituted, insure belief in revelations from the Creator.
</p>

<p>
But if every human being, in order to believe, must
have miracles, there would result such an incessant
violation of the laws of nature as to destroy them, and
thus to destroy all possibility of miracles.
</p>

<p>
The only possible way, then, to establish revelations
to the <emph>race</emph>, is to have them occur at certain
periods of time, and then have them adequately <emph>recorded
and preserved</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
The Bible is a collection of books written at different
periods of the world's history. These books profess
to be records of the various manifestations and
teachings of the Creator to mankind. It is claimed
for them, that their authority is established by miracles
and prophecy, <emph>with all the evidence that is possible,
so far as we can conceive</emph>, and that there are no other
books in the world having any <emph>such</emph> evidence of authorized
revelations from God.
</p>

<p>
No attempt will be made to set forth this evidence,
which, it is claimed, is peculiar to the Bible. The point
here attempted is, to show that, were the Augustinian
system contained in these writings, it would destroy
their claims as <emph>reliable</emph> revelations from God, even allowing
that miracles and prophecy attested their authority.
</p>

<p>
All must allow that it is <emph>possible</emph> to have such things
given in a revelation from God as would destroy its
reliability. For example, suppose it were a fact that
a revelation, supported by miracles, taught that <emph>there
was no God</emph>. This would necessarily destroy its authority
as a revelation from God.
</p>

<p>
Suppose again, that it taught that the Creator, who
wrought the attesting miracles, was a liar, and loved
to deceive his creatures; this would also destroy its
reliability as a guide to truth.
</p>

<p>
Suppose again, that it taught that the Creator was a
being who preferred evil to good, and chose to have
his creatures ignorant and miserable, when he has
power to make them wise and happy. This also
would destroy the reliability of any revelation from
the Creator, even were it sustained by undisputed miracles
and prophecy.
</p>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<p>
This last is precisely what the Augustinian system
<emph>does</emph> teach, and, as its advocates claim, it is a part of a
revelation from the Creator, supported by miracles
and prophecy.
</p>

<p>
In opposition to this, it is maintained that this system
is not to be found in the Bible, and that were it
there, all the miracles and prophecy conceivable could
not prove these writings to be revelations from the
Creator, which are <emph>reliable</emph> as our guide to truth and
happiness. A Creator who wills ignorance and misery
to his creatures, when he has power to will knowledge
and happiness in their place, is not a being to be
believed or trusted as our guide to truth and happiness.
</p>

<p>
It is in this light that the Augustinian theory, as a
part of the Bible, brings the question fairly before
<emph>the people</emph>, as <q><emph>Bible or no Bible</emph>?</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXV. Tendencies of the Two Opposing Systems.</head>

<p>
The preceding chapters have presented the distinctive
features of two systems which, in their main
points, are shown to be contradictory, while both are
exhibited as incorporated into the chief creeds and
theological teachings of the Christian world.
</p>

<p>
It is the object of this chapter to point out the <emph>tendencies</emph>
of these antagonistic systems.
</p>

<p>
It is maintained, that the common-sense system,
resting as it does on implanted principles common to
all minds, is evolved and held very much in proportion
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
to the development of the reasoning powers and
the moral sense.
</p>

<p>
That part of this system which relates to man's
duties and best interests <emph>in this life</emph>, without reference
to a future state, has been more harmoniously evolved
by the wise and good of all ages and nations than any
other. Thus, in the teachings of Confucius, Zoroaster,
Gaudama, Solon, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca,
and the Antonines, who are among the chief
heathen sages, we can find nearly all the moral duties
of man, to himself and to his fellow-man, which
are to be found in the Bible. It is true that there are
diversities and deficiencies in all; but a large body of
pure morality could be made up from their united
teachings. The account given of the system of Boodhism
in a previous chapter is one illustration of this
fact.
</p>

<p>
But, while it is comparatively easy for the good
and wise heathen to reason out what is <emph>best</emph> for man
in this life, as taught by experience, the grand failure
is in <emph>motives</emph> which will secure <emph>obedience</emph> to the rules of
virtue. <q>We see the right and yet the wrong pursue,</q>
has been the universal lament of humanity.
</p>

<p>
The character of the Creator, as <q>the Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gracious, slow unto anger, of great
kindness;</q> <q>who doth not <emph>willingly</emph> afflict or grieve
the children of men;</q> who <q>like as a father pitieth
his children;</q> who is <q>a father of the fatherless
and a judge of the widow;</q> <q>a God without iniquity,
just and right;</q> <q>a judge of the fatherless and
the poor;</q> who <q>shall judge the world with righteousness;</q>
<q>a righteous God, who trieth the heart
and the reins;</q> who <q>will regard the prayer of the
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
destitute;</q> who <q>knoweth the wants of the heart;</q>
<q>who knoweth our down-sitting and up-rising, and
is acquainted with all our ways;</q> who is <q>a righteous
Lord who loveth righteousness;</q> <q>whose judgments
are all right;</q> whose <q>word is right;</q> whose <q>word
is truth from the beginning;</q> who is <q>plenteous in
mercy and truth;</q> such a character as this, as it is
recorded in the Jewish sacred books, was never
evolved or set forth by the wisest and best sages
of all the earth, unaided by these writings.
</p>

<p>
That such a Being regards our race with long-suffering
compassion, and came himself to earth, by his
teachings, example and <emph>self-sacrificing</emph> love, to save us
from sin, this was never even <emph>imagined</emph> by any of the
heathen sages of earth.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>power of motive</emph>, secured by a belief in the omnipresence,
sympathy and love of such a God, never
was attained by the unaided reasoning of any human
being.
</p>

<p>
The fact that the soul survives the dissolution of
the body, and that the good go where they are happy,
and the wicked where they are punished, has been
more or less clearly evolved by the heathen world.
In some nations, as for example the followers of
Boodhism, this doctrine is quite definite and distinct,
but with most heathen nations all their notions on
this subject are dim, shadowy and unpractical.
</p>

<p>
It is those nations alone, who have had access to
the Bible, who have ever attained the <emph>powerful motives</emph>
which are found in the system of common sense.
And yet, as has been shown, these influences have
been, to a great extent, nullified by a contradictory
system.
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
It is claimed, that the system of common sense is
the one on which the revelations of the Creator, contained
in the Bible, are founded. This being so, those
who are most developed in their reasoning powers,
and who also yield the most reverence to the Bible,
are those who are most powerfully protected against
the pernicious tendencies of the antagonistic system of
Augustine.
</p>

<p>
Thus, a system which is antagonistic to reason and
common sense, has, by ecclesiastical authority and
perversion, been fastened most firmly on that class
of minds who bring all their cultivated powers to
its defense, while at the same time the very cultivation
of these powers, and their reverence for the
Bible, tend to the destruction of the same system.
We consequently find the strongest defenders, and
the strongest antagonists of the Augustinian system,
in those sects who were educated within its entrenchments.
</p>

<p>
If common sense and the Bible are to conquer this
false system, it must be done by those whose common
sense and reverence for the Bible are most effective
and most prominent. And yet this class of persons
are the ones, who would the most vigorously apply
their energies in the defense of a system in which
they have been trained from infancy, and which is
sustained by all the power of public sentiment, and
church organization. This being premised, the tendencies
of the two antagonistic systems will now be
set forth.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXVI. Tendencies of the Two Systems As They Respect
the Cultivation of the Moral and Intellectual
Powers.</head>

<p>
The system of common sense rests on the assumption
that there are principles of right and wrong
founded on the eternal nature of things, existing independently
of the will of the Creator in his own
eternal mind, and by which his character and conduct
may be judged.
</p>

<p>
The human mind is constructed in accordance with
these principles, as the embryo image of the Eternal
Creator. By the aid of these principles, we discover
the design and character of God in the <emph>nature</emph> of his
works, and can perceive what is right or wrong in
moral action as tending to fulfill or oppose this design.
Thus we are enabled to understand and to adore
the rectitude, wisdom and goodness of our Creator, as
manifested either in his works or in more direct revelations
from him.
</p>

<p>
According to this system, all voluntary action is
right which produces happiness without violating the
laws of God. Thus every person who is making self or
others happy in the <emph>best</emph> way, guided by the teachings
of experience or by revelations from God, is fulfilling
the great design of our Maker, and thus pleasing him
by promoting his chief desire.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, the Augustinian system assumes
that the human mind, being totally depraved, is entirely
disqualified to judge of the character and ways of
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
God. Nay more, it assumes that there is no standard
of right and wrong by which we can judge of the rectitude
of the ways of God.
</p>

<p>
According to this theory, the fact that God wills a
thing is what makes it right; so that any thing is right
if God does it, and true if he says it, however contrary
it may be to our moral nature and common sense.
</p>

<p>
In the teachings of moral science, founded on this
theory, it is maintained that God has formed our
minds to feel certain emotions of approval or disapproval
in view of certain relations and actions, which
are right or wrong only as agreeing or disagreeing
with his will. But as the mind of man is depraved,
this constitution is no certain guide, and we
are dependent on direct revelations from God to teach
us what is in agreement with his will. Yet here again
we are at fault; for such is our depravity that we are
disqualified to <emph>interpret</emph> these revelations, except as we
are regenerated by God.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, man has no means of judging of the
designs or character of his Maker&mdash;nor, while unregenerate,
as most of our race are and have been, has he
any sure means of discovering the will of God, either
by reason or revelation, saving as he may find infallible
priestly interpreters.
</p>

<div>
<head>Tendencies of the Two Systems in Regard to the Cultivation
of the Reasoning Powers and Moral Sense.</head>

<p>
The common-sense system, resting on the assumption
that <emph>happiness-making, according to the laws of
God</emph>, is the chief end of man, naturally leads to
the development of the intellect and reason in order
to discover these laws, and to the devotion of all our
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
powers to happiness-making, according to these laws.
This being so, every thing that tends to make enjoyment
and diminish evil without violating law, is valued
as good and right. All noble, generous, self-sacrificing
and honorable sentiments and acts are regarded as
right, pleasing to the Father of all, and tending equally
to promote the best good of ourselves and of all our fellow-beings.
In this light we become <emph>one</emph> with the Father
and with all good beings just so far as we obey all
the physical, social and moral laws of our Creator, and
thus conform to his will, and add to his happiness. Thus
the direct tendency of this system is to promote an
earnest desire, first to discover all that is true and right,
and then to follow it. And such efforts naturally tend
both to develop our highest powers, and to bring the
mind into harmony and communion with the Father
of our spirits.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, the Augustinian system, resting on
the assumption that all the plans and ways of God are
a mystery beyond our comprehension; that man, by
nature, has no power to understand what is right
or wrong in God's dispensations; that what we call
goodness and virtue in unregenerate minds is not so
in God's sight; that every act of every unrenewed
mind is sin, and only sin; that until regenerated we
never do any thing to move God to re-create our
ruined nature; all this in its <emph>tendency</emph> leads to recklessness,
hopelessness and neglect of all virtuous efforts,
as useless in regard to our highest interests. As before
intimated, these tendencies are more or less counteracted
by the teachings of common sense and the
Bible. Still, such tendencies must always be, more or
less, effective and disastrous.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXVII. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Respect to
Individual Religious Experience.</head>

<p>
The Augustinian system, assuming that true personal
religion consists in the exercises of <q>a new nature,</q>
tends to introverted mental efforts, in order to
discover whether the signs of such a nature exist in
ourselves.
</p>

<p>
As, on this theory, it is certain that man will do
nothing to change his fallen nature until the Spirit
of God is given to aid, the great attention and effort
must be directed to those methods, which <q>the
church</q> decides, or experience has proved, to be connected
with the bestowal of this spiritual gift.
</p>

<p>
Not knowing clearly what the depraved nature is,
which is to be changed, nor the certain signs of its existence
or re-creation, nor any certain mode of securing
the desired change, there is a perplexing variety
of vague instructions as to <q>what we must do to be
saved?</q>
</p>

<p>
In illustration of this, the following from an article
by the editor of the Methodist Quarterly, shows how
Wesley and his followers instruct on this subject:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>I have continually testified, in private and in public,</q> says
Wesley, <q>that we are sanctified as well as justified by faith.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This being first stated, the great question follows,
<emph>what is that faith</emph> by which we are justified and sanctified?
The answer is this:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It is a divine evidence and conviction, first that God hath promised
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
it in the holy Scriptures; secondly, that what God hath
promised he is <emph>able</emph> to perform; thirdly, that he is <emph>able and willing</emph>
to do it <emph>now</emph>. To this, is to be added one thing more: a divine
conviction <emph>that he doeth it</emph>. In that hour it is done.</q><note place='foot'>From the article on Sanctification, in the magazine <hi rend='italic'>Beauty of Holiness</hi>,
January, 1859.</note>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
That is, in order to be justified and sanctified we
must have a divine evidence and conviction that God
is <emph>able</emph> and <emph>willing</emph>, and actually <emph>does now</emph> give the justification
and sanctification we seek. In other words,
in order to gain what we seek we must believe that
we have gained it. In order to get a blessing we must
believe that we possess it.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is, that one of the largest sects of our country
is instructed by its founder and his most intelligent
and learned followers, as to the way of salvation
from everlasting and inconceivable misery. It will be
remembered, that this class of divines teach that the
depravity of man's mind consists in the <emph>deprivation</emph> of
God's Spirit, which is withheld from all the descendants
of Adam on account of his sin.
</p>

<p>
The following presents the mode of instruction in
which the author was educated. It is contained in a
letter from Dr. Nettleton, a celebrated revival preacher,
who often resided with the author's father during revivals
in which they were co-laborers. This letter
was written to oppose the views of the New Haven
divines, who maintained that, although in consequence
of Adam's sin, there is a tendency or bias to
evil so powerful as to insure <q>sin, and only sin</q> till
regeneration occurs, yet that <emph>the act</emph> of regeneration
consists in a choice or purpose on the part of man
himself.
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<p>
In reference to these views of Dr. Taylor and others,
Dr. Nettleton says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>They adopt a <emph>new theory of regeneration</emph>. It has been said by
some that regeneration consists <emph>in removing this sinful bias</emph>, which
is anterior to actual volition; this they deny. But whether we
call this propensity <emph>sinful</emph> or not, all orthodox divines who have
admitted its existence have, I believe, united in the opinion that
regeneration <emph>does</emph> consist in removing it,</q> [which the New Haven
divines denying, they are excluded from the <q>orthodox</q> ranks, in
the view of Dr. N.]
</p>

</quote>

<p>
He continues thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>No sinner ever did or ever will make a holy choice prior to an
<emph>inclination</emph>, <emph>bias</emph> or <emph>tendency</emph> to holiness.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>On the whole their [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the New Haven divines] views of depravity,
of regeneration and of the mode of preaching to sinners
can not fail, I think, of doing very great mischief. This exhibition
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that regeneration consists in <emph>man's choice</emph>] overlooks the most
alarming feature of human depravity and <emph>the very essence of experimental
religion</emph>. It is directly calculated to prevent sinners from
coming under conviction of sin....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The progress of conviction ordinarily is as follows: <emph>Trouble
and alarm</emph> first, on account of <emph>outward</emph> sins; secondly, on account
of hardness of heart, deadness and insensibility to divine things,&mdash;<emph>tendency</emph>,
<emph>bias</emph>, <emph>proneness</emph> or <emph>propensity to sin</emph>, both inferred and
felt; and this the convicted sinner always regards, not merely as
calamitous, but as <emph>awfully criminal</emph> in the sight of God. And the
sinner utterly despairs of salvation <emph>without a change in this propensity
to sin</emph>. And while he feels this propensity to be thus criminal,
he is fully aware that if God, by a sovereign act of his grace,
does not interpose to remove or change it, he shall never give his
heart to God, <emph>nor make one holy choice</emph>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The great point taught by Dr. Nettleton and his
associates was, that man has a depraved nature consisting
in a bias or propensity to sin, consequent on
Adam's sin, for which we are <q>awfully criminal in
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
the sight of God,</q> and which man himself will never
remedy; that regeneration consists in the change of
this bias by God, and that until God does make this
change man will <q>never give his heart to God nor
make one holy choice.</q> And yet his sermons, as
the writer heard them month after month, abounded
in pungent addresses to sinners, commanding them in
God's name to <q>give their hearts to God,</q> and maintaining
that their inability to do so was owing to their
own fault and <emph>unwillingness</emph> to do so.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, the New Haven divines, in the
same pulpit, were urging <emph>their</emph> views, showing that regeneration
consisted in <q>choosing God and his service;</q>
that man was fully able to do this, and yet
that owing to his depraved nature, he never would do
it, until that nature was in some way changed by God.
Meantime, on their view also, every voluntary act,
previous to regeneration, was <q>sin, and only sin.</q>
Nor had God pointed out any sure mode of obtaining
from him the gift of regenerating grace. They, however,
urged that the results of <emph>experience</emph> proved that
regeneration, though not promised to unregenerate
doings, is, as a matter of fact, bestowed more frequently
on those who use <q>the means of grace,</q> such
as prayer, reading the Bible and frequenting religious
meetings, than on those who do not.
</p>

<p>
The points of difference between the New Haven
theologians and their opponents, seemed to be, that
the former taught that regeneration was the act of
man himself in choosing God's service; while Dr.
Nettleton and his associates taught that it consisted
in the change of man's <emph>nature</emph> by God, and not in
what was done by man himself. The New Haven
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
theologians have been more definite in their attempts
to explain the exact nature of regeneration than any
other class. They all agree, however, that man never
will, in any case, become regenerated until God in
some measure rectifies the injury done to human nature
by Adam's sin; that God points out no definite
way to secure this aid; and that previous to regeneration
every moral act of man is <q>sin, and only sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
As to the signs or evidence of regeneration, those
who teach that man's depravity consists in the <emph>deprivation</emph>
of God's Spirit, on account of Adam's sin, often
lead to the expectation of some sudden <q>light and
joy,</q> as the first evidence of regeneration. Such,
also, follow Wesley's direction, and try to believe that
they <emph>are</emph> justified and sanctified, in order to become so.
Others point out certain emotions toward God or toward
Jesus Christ as the proof of the commencement
of a new nature.
</p>

<p>
Some divines lead to the impression that the new
nature consists in a mysterious indwelling of God in
the soul, or a union of our nature to his, so that when
it takes place, there is a natural outflowing of good
feelings and good works, as there was of evil before
this union. But they point out no intelligible way of
gaining this union.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic church teaches that regeneration is
conferred by the rite of baptism, and that thus a seed
or some mysterious principle is implanted, which is
developed by use of the forms and rites of <q>the
church,</q> and exhibited in <q>good works.</q> The Episcopal
churches, more or less, retain this view in the
teachings of their clergy.
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>Saving faith</emph>,</q> or the <q>faith which justifies,</q> is described
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
by religious teachers with most singular and
inconsistent forms of expression. If any person will
make a collection of the various diverse explanations
of this indispensable requisite to eternal life, it would
prove a most mournful illustration of vague teachings
in reply to the great question, <q>What must we do to
be saved?</q>
</p>

<p>
The following extract was prepared by a very intelligent
theological student at the request of the author,
in reference to the great question, <q>What must
we do to be saved?</q> as set forth in a recent work, highly
recommended for its clear and practical views on
this great matter. This work, entitled <q><hi rend='italic'>The Higher
Christian Life</hi>,</q> exhibits not only the author's views
of what regeneration consists in, but his views of another
subject that has greatly interested many minds
in the religious world, under the name of <hi rend='italic'>Christian
Perfection</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have examined, as you requested, the book entitled <q><hi rend='italic'>The
Higher Christian Life</hi>,</q> with a view of gaining the author's definition
of <q>conversion,</q> or <q>regeneration,</q> and his directions for
securing it, and also his idea of what the <q>second conversion</q>
consists in. His view of the first conversion, or regeneration, <emph>is
the generally entertained one</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <emph>it is the pardon of our sins</emph>. This
pardon is instantaneous and entire. The moment a soul believes
in Christ, and accepts his atonement, that moment it experiences
<emph>a complete sense of pardoned sin</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Luther experienced this when, after fasting, and watching, and
struggling under the weight of sins unforgiven had brought him
to the brink of the grave, these words were brought home to his
mind, <q>I believe in the forgiveness of sins.</q> From that moment
<q>joy filled his soul, and he arose quickly from the depths of despair
and the bed of sickness.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><emph>Second conversion is the cleansing from sin</emph>, which the author
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
says <q>is a work of indefinite length,</q> and in this particular alone
differs from the first conversion.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But, in the examples cited by him, the experience of this second
conversion has been as instantaneous as the first. Luther,
climbing Pilate's stair-case on his hands and knees, for the purpose
of gaining holiness, was brought to his feet by the truth,
<q>The just shall live <emph>by faith</emph>.</q> <q>Then,</q> Luther says, <q>I felt myself
born again. As a new man I entered by an open door into
the very Paradise of God.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So in all the other examples of this author, the apprehension
of <emph>Christ as the way</emph>, is instantaneous; and yet he says <q>the work
of Christ remains yet to be done in the future.</q> In this point
only does it differ from the first conversion, that it is not all done
in an instant, although, as I have said before, his examples all
make the impression that in both cases the work is instantaneous.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This extract is not given as a <emph>correct</emph> exhibition of
the views of this author, for it may not do him justice.
It is given to show how vague and indefinite
are the teachings of religious writers and preachers on
this subject. Here is a book recommended for its <emph>clear
views</emph> by the highest class of minds. It is read and
re-read by an intelligent, well-educated young man,
who is studying theology in one of our first seminaries.
He then gives this author's view of regeneration,
as that which he supposes to be contained in
that book, and also as <q><emph>the one generally entertained</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
And what is this answer to the great question,
<q>What must we do to be saved?</q>&mdash;a question on
which the happiness of endless ages is suspended.
</p>

<p>
<emph>It is the pardon of sin</emph>, which <q>is instantaneous and
entire.</q> This is something which God does, and this,
as it would seem, is regeneration.
</p>

<p>
Next it is stated that <q>the moment a soul <emph>believes in
Christ and accepts his atonement</emph>, that moment it experiences
<emph>a complete sense of pardoned sin</emph>.</q> Here one
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
must ask, <q>what is signified by believing in Christ and
accepting his atonement? Is this also regeneration,
and if so, does it consist in the intellectual assent to
the proposition that Christ as God suffered and died,
and by this act secured the pardon of our sin?</q> There
is nothing given to decide these queries.
</p>

<p>
Next, it is stated that this act of faith is followed by
<q><emph>a complete sense</emph> of pardoned sin.</q> Is <emph>this</emph> regeneration,
or is it a <emph>part</emph> of it? There is nothing given to
decide this question.
</p>

<p>
It is certain that the young man, totally failed in
his efforts to secure any <emph>clear</emph> and <emph>definite</emph> conceptions
of the author's meaning, exactly as has been the case
with the writer herself, for whom the above extract
was prepared.
</p>

<p>
It has been the privilege of the writer, often to
listen to the preaching of Dr. Bushnell, one of the
most popular of all our religious teachers. On one
such occasion during the present season, the object of
his sermon seemed to be to teach what was that <emph>true
knowledge of God</emph>, which he urged on his hearers.
</p>

<p>
He stated that it was not merely an intellectual apprehension
of his character and deeds, but something
which every soul must gain in order to secure eternal
life, something, as it seemed, which he deemed <emph>regeneration</emph>.
</p>

<p>
He finally enunciated this, which seemed to be his
idea of this indispensable experience: <q><emph>It is the return
of God into the human soul</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
In enlarging on this, he described something which
was so vague and indefinite as to make it useless to
attempt to state the impression made. Afterward, aid
was sought from one of the preacher's constant and
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
most intelligent hearers. <q>Does Dr. Bushnell believe
in a preëxistent state, when God, in the manner set
forth, was <emph>in</emph> the soul of each human being? If not,
what does he mean by a <q>return of God into the
soul?</q></q> After some discussion, this intelligent parishioner
concluded that his meaning probably was,
that when we desire and intend wholly to submit
our wills to that of God, and to be guided wholly by
him, we become in this respect <emph>one</emph> with God. And
this is what is meant by God's <emph>return</emph> into the soul.
At what <emph>previous</emph> time this state of union was experienced,
and then lost, so that regeneration is its <q>return,</q>
seemed to remain, as it respects information to
be gained from parishioners, a matter of hopeless
speculation.
</p>

<p>
In a family of whom eight are ministers of religion,
and several are theological professors, the one who
has seemed most fully to agree with the writer in explaining
the nature of regeneration, is the <hi rend='italic'>Star contributor
to the Independent</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that Phrenology is antagonistic
to the Augustinian theory of implanted evil propensities,
by teaching that every faculty, when developed
and regulated aright, tends to the best good of the
race, so that the extinction of any faculty or propensity
would not be an improvement, but rather an injury
to the constitution of mind.
</p>

<p>
In regard to this brother, here referred to, the system
of Phrenology was embraced by him before his
theological education was commenced, and was never
relinquished. In consequence, his mode of explaining
the nature of regeneration has been diverse from
most accepted methods of theological schools. And
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
yet, when the writer, applied both to his published
articles and to some of his most intelligent, regular
hearers, to ascertain if the common-sense view of regeneration,
as here stated, was in perfect agreement
with her brother's views, it seemed difficult to decide.
</p>

<p>
In reading some of the Star Papers, the common-sense
view of regeneration is clear and unmistakable;
in others, there are statements as to the <emph>distinctive</emph> nature
of Christian character, which seem to be both
additional and diverse. The result is, an uncertainty
as to the exact idea of what regeneration consists in,
as taught by this brother.<note place='foot'><ref target='Note_F'>Note F</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The editors of the Independent quote the following
sentence from <hi rend='italic'>Common Sense Applied to Religion, or
the Bible and the People</hi>, as a statement of <q>the
doctrine of the new birth,</q> which is <q>not materially
different</q> from that held by <q>the fathers and mothers
of New England for eight successive generations:</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The <q>second birth</q> is the sudden or the gradual entrance into a
life, in which the will of the Creator is to control the self-will of the
creature, while under the influence of love and gratitude to him,
and guided by <q>faith</q> in his teachings, <emph>living chiefly for the great
commonwealth</emph> takes the place of <emph>living chiefly for self</emph>. For this,
the supernatural aid of the Holy Spirit is promised to all who seek
it, and without this aid, success is hopeless. But the grand instrumentality
is <emph>right training</emph> by parents and teachers.</q> (Common
Sense, etc., p. 333.)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Let this statement, by the Independent, of what
the new birth consists in, as held by the fathers and
mothers of New England, be compared with the preceding
account of <q>conversion,</q> given by a young
theologian, born in Connecticut, and educated at Yale
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
College, as the <q>generally entertained one,</q> and the
case is rendered increasingly difficult and perplexing.
</p>

<p>
In the view of the author, <emph>all</emph> theologians do so far
hold the common-sense theory of regeneration, that
when they find a person whose will seems to be entirely
subjected to the will of God, while <q>under the
influence of love and gratitude to Him, and guided by
faith in his teachings, <emph>living chiefly for the great commonwealth
takes the place of living chiefly for self</emph></q>&mdash;such
a person is regarded by them as <emph>regenerated</emph>. At the
same time, bound by the Augustine system, they give
other views of the nature of regeneration, which are
vague and conflicting, as has been illustrated in the
preceding pages.<note place='foot'><p>In regard to the author of the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi>, the writer is still uncertain
whether he would or would not assent to the common-sense
view of regeneration, here stated, as exact and complete, or whether he
supposes that the <q>habit of sinning, generated in a preëxistent state,</q>
is changed by some direct operation of the Spirit of God on the <q>nature</q>
or faculties of the human mind, which is antecedent to any right
voluntary action on the part of man, and without which, every moral
act of every unregenerated mind is <q>sin, and only sin.</q>
</p>
<p>
These personal references are introduced to illustrate more effectively
the vague and diversified teachings of theologians and religious teachers
in answer to the great question, on which they claim that an
eternity of blessedness or misery is depending.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
From all this results endless anxiety, doubt and
distress, in conscientious minds, from uncertainty
whether their depraved nature has been changed, and
from perplexity in view of the multifarious modes of
teaching in regard to the nature and signs of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
From this, too, results false confidence and indifference
to right and wrong conduct, in those who
imagine they discover in themselves the signs of a
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
regenerated nature, which will, as they are led to believe,
secure heaven without reference to the amount
of good or evil deeds.
</p>

<p>
This same incertitude as to what regeneration is,
has also tended to induce the fanaticism, extravagance
and absurdities often connected with religious excitements.
</p>

<p>
The idea that there is to be some mysterious change
in the soul by the gift of God's Spirit; that this is to
be gained by prayer; that the evidence of this change
is to be found in sudden and great mental agitation;
together with the belief that an <emph>eternity</emph> of misery or
bliss is depending on such a change; and that death
is the end of all hope&mdash;all this tends to great extremes
of distress and excitement.
</p>

<div>
<head>Tendencies of the Common-Sense System.</head>

<p>
In contrast to these tendencies of the Augustinian
system, in regard to individual religious experience,
we notice those of the common-sense system. According
to the latter, the <emph>first birth</emph> brings man into
existence as an undeveloped being, with perfect and
wonderful capacities of knowledge, enjoyment and
self-control. The first period of existence is necessarily
a period of <emph>experimenting</emph>, in which mind is
dependent on others for most of the knowledge indispensable
to right action, and also for the training of
the physical, social and moral habits. It is impossible
to choose aright, intelligently, until a child learns <emph>what
is right</emph>, and this is a slow and gradual process. In
some cases, by a careful training, early virtuous principles
and habits may be so induced, that there can
not be any marked period in which the mind comes
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
under the control of <emph>a ruling purpose</emph> to obey all the
rules of rectitude as disclosed by reason and experience,
or by revelations from God.
</p>

<p>
In other cases, the child may grow up to manhood
entirely unregulated by any such purpose, while self-gratification,
unrestrained by rules, is the perpetual
aim. In such cases, a sudden change, in which the
man forms and carries out a ruling purpose to act
righteously and virtuously, in all his relations to man,
to God and to himself, may take place. This change,
in the language of common life, would be expressed
thus: <q>The man has begun a new life; he is a new
creature.</q> And by a figurative use of language, the
change might be called <q>a new birth,</q> or, in theological
language, <q>regeneration.</q> In such a case, the
chief desire or ruling passion would be, to discover and
to obey all the physical, social and moral laws of the
Creator, as they are taught by reason and experience,
or by revelations from God.
</p>

<p>
Such an experience would be properly expressed by
the terms, <emph>faith</emph> in God, <emph>love</emph> to God, <emph>repentance</emph> toward
God, <emph>as these terms are used by men in common life</emph>. Thus
<q>regeneration,</q> according to the common-sense system,
becomes an intelligible, rational and practical
matter.
</p>

<p>
In case of a revelation from God by a prophet or
messenger, confidence in, and obedience to, the teachings
of that messenger, would be practical or saving
faith, both in God and in his messenger also. Thus,
if Christ is proved to be a messenger from God by
miracles, whoever <emph>practically believes</emph> in Christ, believes
in God also. And just so far as a man understands
Christ's teachings <emph>aright</emph>, and <emph>purposes</emph> to obey him,
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
and <emph>carries out</emph> this purpose, just so far he has faith,
and love, and repentance toward God and toward
Christ. And as men are named by the name of those
they obey, every man is a <emph>true Christian</emph> just so far as
he understands Christ's teachings <emph>aright</emph> and <emph>obeys</emph>
them.
</p>

<p>
In this view of the case, the true <q><emph>signs of regeneration</emph></q>
would be each person's consciousness of the great
end and purpose of his life, and the fruits or results
of this purpose in an habitual obedience to the physical,
social and moral laws of God, as learned by reason,
experience and revelation. Thus the answer to
the great question of life becomes clear, harmonious
and practical, furnishing the means for every person
to judge of his own character and prospects.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXVIII. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Reference
to the Character of God.</head>

<p>
It has been shown (<ref target='Chapter_24'>chapter 24</ref>) that <emph>emotive</emph> love,
in view of noble and interesting traits of character, affords
a most powerful motive in securing <emph>voluntary
love</emph> or <emph>good willing</emph> according to the laws of God.
This is the grand reason why it is so important that
all his creatures should regard their Creator, whose
laws they must obey, as perfect in every noble and
lovable quality. This would render it easy and delightful
to obey his will.
</p>

<p>
The principle of gratitude is the strongest in our
nature, in calling forth desires to please another. This
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
renders it so important that we should regard our
Maker, not only as noble and lovely, but as the dispenser
of innumerable and constant favors to ourselves
and to those whom we love.
</p>

<p>
The highest emotions of love and gratitude are
evoked when a noble and lovely benefactor condescends
to humiliation, suffering, and even to death to
rescue from great calamity. And the greater the danger
and suffering from which this goodness rescues,
the stronger the gratitude and the desire to please the
benefactor.
</p>

<p>
In this view we can conceive of no way in which
our Creator could so powerfully influence his creatures
to virtuous self-sacrifice for the general good in
obedience to his laws, as by such an exhibition on his
part.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown [<ref target='Chapter_28'>Chapter 28</ref>] that by the light of
reason and experience alone, we infer that our race
are exposed to dreadful risk and danger of evils,
which to <emph>some</emph> will prove interminable. If, then, it
can be made to appear that our Creator has submitted
to great humiliation and suffering to rescue us, and
that his <emph>chief desire</emph> is that his creatures should obey
his beneficent laws, the strongest conceivable motives
would be secured to lead to glad obedience to the rules
of virtue. And having shown that the chief end of our
Creator is to do all in his power to make the most possible
happiness, we should infer that he had made
or would make such a manifestation of his character
to his creatures. And were this revealed to us
as done, such a revelation would properly be called
<q>glad tidings,</q> as that which was best fitted to save
men from sin and suffering.
</p>

<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>

<p>
According to the system of common sense, our
Creator is presented as the Almighty Father, who
forms each finite mind an embryo image of his own
all perfect mind, with the great design of making all
the happiness possible. Although the highest happiness
of each and of all, depends on the perfect action
of every mind, such action is not possible in the nature
of things except as a knowledge of his laws and
of the motives to secure obedience are made known
by finite educators, who must first be trained themselves
by a long and slow process. Thus every mind
is dependent for its final success in attaining perfect
obedience to law, and for perfected happiness, on God,
on finite educators and on self.
</p>

<p>
In carrying forward the development and education
of our race, the Creator always has done and always
will do the <emph>best that is possible</emph> for the good of all. And
yet, so far as reason and experience teach, some will be
<emph>ruined for ever</emph>. The deteriorating process begun in
this life, and its baleful results, will continue for ever.
</p>

<p>
The great consummation, when those that are hopelessly
ruined will be separated from the good, is at an
indefinite period ahead, and may be many ages, while
the same process of labor and training are proceeding
in the unseen world, and yet so that the conduct and
character formed in this life have a <emph>decided influence</emph>
on the whole course of existence that follows.
</p>

<p>
Thus when the good man dies we may hope that
his upward career is eternally secure. But when the
wicked die there must be <q>a certain fearful looking
for of judgment and fiery indignation.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Creator does, has done, and will do <emph>all that is
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
possible</emph> to save all that <emph>can</emph> be saved from this doom,
and as the highest possible motives we can conceive
to secure this end, would be the appearance of our
Creator in human form as a teacher of his laws, an
example of virtue and a self-sacrificing Saviour, we
infer that he has done or will do this, at the time and
in the manner which is best fitted to the great end in
view.
</p>

<p>
The Augustinian system presents a view of the
character and conduct of the Creator in mournful
contrast to this.
</p>

<p>
Our only idea of a perfectly benevolent being is
that of one who prefers happiness to suffering, and
who does <emph>all in his power</emph> to promote one and prevent
the other. Our only idea of a malevolent being is,
that he wills misery when he has full power to make
happiness in its stead. Our only evidence of the <emph>moral</emph>
character of a being (or that exhibited in <emph>willing</emph>) is
<emph>the nature</emph> of his works. On the Augustinian theory,
all the chief works of the Creator's hand, the immortal
minds, which alone give value to any other existences,
are depraved so totally that there is no really
good act done by any one of them till created anew.
</p>

<p>
In other words, the Creator, having full power to
make every mind perfect in nature, and who still has
power to re-create all with perfect natures, has instituted
a system by which the sin of one man entails a
depraved nature on a whole race, while the evil as yet
has been remedied only in the case of a small, <q>elect</q>
number. All the rest are doomed to eternal misery
for conduct which is the certain consequence of this
misformed nature.
</p>

<p>
To save men from the punishment of the sins consequent
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
on their depraved nature, Christ, the most
perfect and only unsinning being that ever visited
earth, undergoes deep humiliation and excruciating
sufferings.
</p>

<p>
To call such conduct as this <emph>just</emph>, or <emph>kind</emph>, or <emph>merciful</emph>,
is a violation of all our ideas of the meaning of
such terms. What kindness is there in giving existence
to <emph>any</emph> being on such terms? What blessings
are all the comforts and enjoyments of this life, so
soon to be snatched away, thus making the contrast
of future misery so much the more horrible? What
mercy is there in any mode of rectifying a wrong so
needlessly inflicted? What mercy, or what justice is
there in adding to all the miseries of our race the sufferings
of so noble and lovely a being as Jesus Christ,
when all, and more than all, effected by his agonies,
could be so much more justly and reasonably secured
by regenerating all the minds thus needlessly ruined
in their nature? This strange and mysterious transaction
only adds to the terror and gloom that shroud
such a Creator, whose character can be learned only
by the <emph>nature</emph> of his works.
</p>

<p>
To call all this a <emph>mystery</emph> is a misuse of terms, for
there is no mystery about it. More direct, clear, and
open injustice, folly and malevolence, can not possibly
be expressed in human language than that here set
forth and ascribed to God.
</p>

<p>
Every mind instinctively asks, why did not the
Creator give us a perfect nature when he has the
power to do so? Why does he not stop all the sin
and misery resulting from the depraved nature of
man by regenerating all, when he has power to do
so? How can we either respect or love a being who
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
has done such awful and endless wrong to our race,
and for no conceivable good made known to us?
What cause of gratitude for the sufferings and death
of Christ to save the few of us who alone are to escape
from such needless and intolerable evils?
</p>

<p>
Meantime, the various theories invented to relieve
the baleful impression thus made as to the character
of our Creator, only add new difficulties.
</p>

<p>
To say that this perpetuated mode of bringing
ruined minds into existence, is a penalty for a single
sin of the first pair, thousands of years ago, what a violation
of all our ideas of justice! To say that this
transaction is <emph>just</emph> because Adam was <q><emph>regarded</emph></q> by
God as <q>the federal head</q> of our race, and that he
<q>imputes</q> the sin of the father to all his descendants,
what is this, to our conceptions, but puerile folly added
to the baldest cruelty and injustice?
</p>

<p>
To say that we all <q>sinned <emph>in</emph> Adam,</q> thousands
of years before we were born, and are punished by a
ruined nature, so far as we can conceive of such an
absurd proposition, what is this penalty better than
inflicting endless tortures on myriads of new-born
infants for their first ignorant and unconscious sin?
</p>

<p>
To say that <emph>man</emph>, or <emph>Adam</emph> is the author of all this
ineffable wrong, because it is done by <q>a constitutional
transmission</q> from parent to child, of which
God is the author, when he had full power to make
each child perfect in nature, what is this but adding
to cruelty and injustice a mean subterfuge in order to
cast the blame on Adam and his race?
</p>

<p>
The mind turns from a God so represented, with
horror and dismay, and it is only by concealing this
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
system, by representations that are <emph>perfectly contradictory</emph>,
that the baleful impression is lessened.
</p>

<p>
The view of God's character thus presented by the
Augustinian theory, not only lessens the power of motive
which the common-sense view of the Creator's
character affords, but brings a powerful positive influence
to turn the human mind from that love and obedience
toward God which is so indispensable to peace
and happiness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XXXIX. Tendencies of the Two Systems as to Church
Organizations.</head>

<p>
It has been shown that the common-sense theory
teaches that all mankind must, in order to eternal
happiness, be trained by human agencies to choose
what is <emph>best</emph>, guided by the laws of God, as learned by
experience or by revelation.
</p>

<p>
Under the guidance of this general principle, <emph>associated</emph>
bodies would result, whose aim would be discussion
and instruction to discover and perpetuate a
<emph>knowledge</emph> of the rules of rectitude, and to secure all
those <emph>motives</emph> which experience has proved to be most
effective in securing obedience to these rules. In other
words, the chief end of such associations would be
to find out what is <emph>best</emph> and thus right, and also the
<emph>best</emph> modes of securing right action.
</p>

<p>
The experience of mankind has shown that the
most effective way to extend and perpetuate any religion
is to have a body of men supported who shall
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
give their chief energies and time to this object. Social
gatherings at regular periods have also been found
effective to this end. In short, were a system of religion
established, founded <emph>exclusively</emph> and <emph>consistently</emph>
on experience and common sense, it would include
sabbaths of interrupted worldly affairs, social gatherings
to promote worshipful obedience to the Creator
and a body of men educated and sustained for the express
purpose of discovering, instructing in and perpetuating
the intellectual, social, moral and religious
interests of humanity. Such a ministry would be not
dogmatic teachers, but leaders in discussions and investigations.
</p>

<p>
The great aim of all these arrangements would be to
discover by inquiry and discussion what is best in all
human interests and affairs, in view of the immortality
of man, and the risks and dangers of eternity, and
also to devise the best modes of influencing all to right
action.
</p>

<p>
Were this life the end of our being, and were all
questions of right and wrong to be settled in reference
to the well-being of our race in this short span, no
such separate class of religious leaders and organized
instrumentalities would be needful. But if men are
to be <emph>trained</emph> to act with reference to the invisible
state as the <emph>chief</emph> concern, then organized instrumentalities
to resist the overruling tide of worldliness become
indispensable.
</p>

<p>
The full tendencies of such organizations, based <emph>exclusively</emph>
on the principles of common sense, must be a
matter of speculation merely, for the world has had
no experience of this kind. As yet we have only the
experience of mankind as to systems in which the
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
teachings of common sense have been combined with
contradictory influences of false dogmas, which have
been sustained by the strongest organizations, civil
and ecclesiastical.
</p>

<p>
We will now trace some of the tendencies of the
Augustinian system as they have been exhibited in
the history of church organizations.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the Augustinian theory of a
depraved nature is the foundation doctrine alike of the
Catholic and the Protestant churches. All agree that
man by nature is so miserably misformed that the gift
of the Holy Spirit purchased by Christ to re-create
is his sole hope of escape from everlasting perdition,
while there is little or no ability to understand or obey
God's revealed will until this gift is imparted. From
this originated a priesthood as the medium through
which this renewing gift is to be obtained, and who
are the only authorized interpreters of God's revealed
will. The transmission of this power through the rite
of ordination, preserved in direct succession from the
apostles, is the leading point in the Episcopal organization.
Still more is this carried out to extreme results
in the Catholic church.
</p>

<p>
Both organizations assume that <q>the church</q> which
has this power, does not include <emph>the people</emph>, but is the
priesthood alone. It is the ecclesiastics of these churches
who are to interpret the Bible for the people, and
the people are to receive these decisions as from God.
This is the <emph>theory</emph>, while common sense and the Bible
have more or less modified its practical adoption, especially
in the Episcopal churches.
</p>

<p>
The Puritans of England were the first among the
Protestants who organized churches as consisting solely
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
of those who <q>profess</q> to be <q>regenerated</q> on the
theory of the renewal of the depraved nature derived
from Adam. To this profession in most cases must
be added an examination by persons who are regenerated
in order to ascertain whether the true signs
of a new nature, according to their pattern, really exist.
Such churches are a close corporation, having a
minister to preach and administer baptism and the
sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and deacons, elders,
or committees to decide who shall be received as regenerate
or turned out as unregenerate.
</p>

<p>
Among the Puritans and their descendants originated
another practice which has become prevalent, by
which the churches thus organized as regenerated persons,
also claim the right of infallible interpreters of the
Bible, so far as to exclude all from their communion
who do not profess to agree with their interpretations.
That is to say, all persons, in order to be admitted to
their corporation and to the Lord's table, must not
only profess to be regenerate in the nature transmitted
from Adam, but must confess that they interpret
the Bible according to the notions of the church they
seek to join.
</p>

<p>
It will now be shown that most of our large denominations
in this country are so founded on the
Augustinian dogma that were <emph>the people</emph> all to give up
this theory the whole basis of sectarianism would be
destroyed.
</p>

<p>
The Congregational and Baptist denominations are
severed simply in reference to the rite of baptism as
the mode of admission to their regenerated churches.
The Congregationalists hold that baptism should be
administered by sprinkling, and to the infants of
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
church members as well as to adults joining the church.
The Baptists hold that baptism should be administered
by immersion, and only to adults who join the
church. This is all that divides the two sects.
</p>

<p>
Of course, if all the people ceased to hold that
churches are to consist of persons whose nature received
from Adam is re-created, all churches associated
on the theory would be ended, and so these disputes
about modes of admission would be ended.
</p>

<p>
Again, the Presbyterians and Congregationalists
separate on the question of the appointment and duties
of the <emph>officers</emph> of their churches. The Congregationalists
manage by church committees. Each church
is the sole tribunal in its own affairs, thus being strictly
democratic. The Presbyterian churches manage
the business of each church by <emph>sessions</emph> or <emph>elders</emph> appointed
by the church, and when they fail to give satisfaction,
an appeal is made to a Presbytery consisting
of ministers and elders of several churches.
</p>

<p>
Thus again, if churches organized on the Augustine
theory of the regeneration of a depraved nature
should cease, this dispute in regard to <emph>church officers</emph>
would end, and the Presbyterians, Congregationalists,
and Baptists would find all ground for separation gone.
</p>

<p>
Again, the old and new school Presbyterian churches
separate on questions relating to man's ability to regenerate
himself and in regard to what is the nature
of regeneration.
</p>

<p>
This all depends on the fact of a depraved nature
transmitted from Adam to be regenerated. If this
dogma is relinquished by the people then these two
sects will have no ground for division.
</p>

<p>
Again, the Methodists differ from the other Augustinian
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
sects chiefly in regard to the officers and
management of churches organized on the theory of
a depraved nature received from Adam, which is to
be regenerated. And if such organizations were ended
the ground of separation between the Methodists
and the preceding sects would be removed.
</p>

<p>
Again, the Episcopalian sect is founded on the idea
of a succession of ordained priests through whose agency
the gift of God's Spirit to renew our depraved nature
and to impart the true interpretation of his revelations
is to be obtained.
</p>

<p>
If, then, the people discard the dogma of a depraved
nature consequent on Adam's sin, and assume that
they have perfect natures, and are authorized to interpret
the Bible for themselves, the chief ground for the
existence of this as a separate sect will be removed.
The Catholic church also would soon be ended as a
distinct sect were all the people of that church to discard
these and all opinions and practices immediately
or remotely based on the Augustinian dogma.
</p>

<p>
The preceding will serve to illustrate the position
that the tendency of the common-sense system is to
unite all men in efforts to discover and to obey all
the laws of God for making happiness the <emph>best</emph> way for
time and eternity.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, the Augustinian system tends to
organize mankind into sects contending, not for truth
and happiness, but for certain outward rites and forms
of organization.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XL. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Regard to
Humility, Meekness and a Teachable Spirit.</head>

<p>
The result of receiving <emph>church</emph> interpretations as infallible,
whether of priests or regenerated laity, is the
assumption of a similar infallibility by each person
who thus accepts them.
</p>

<p>
This is accomplished by a very singular fallacy,
thus:
</p>

<p>
The regularly ordained priests, or the regenerated
priests and laity of the <emph>true</emph> church, are claimed to be
the only persons qualified to understand and interpret
the meaning of God's revelations. The question then
is, <emph>which is the true church</emph>? The Catholic says, <q>Mine,
and no other.</q> The Episcopalian says, <q>Mine, and no
other;</q> and so says the Presbyterian. The result is,
each man decides that the true church is <emph>the one that
agrees with his views of what the Bible teaches</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Having thus decided that the church that agrees
with himself is the true church, the man proceeds, not
only to receive reverently the decisions of his church,
but assumes that every other man is bound to do the
same.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic receives one set of interpretations from
the church that he himself has infallibly decided to be
the true church. The Protestant receives the creeds
and confessions of the church he has infallibly decided
to be the true church, whose regenerated ministers and
members are qualified to understand the Bible, as no
unregenerated man can do.
</p>

<p>
Being thus sustained by his own claims as a regenerated
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
person, and also by the claims of the church he
adopts as the true one, there is little foundation for
poverty of spirit, humility and meekness. How can
a man feel <q>poor in spirit,</q> as destitute of the knowledge
requisite for right action, when he has his own
regenerated mind and the guidance of the regenerated
true church? How can a man be meek when others
strive to enlighten him by showing that he is in the
wrong, especially when such efforts are those of the
unregenerated, or those shut out of his true church?
</p>

<p>
How can a man become very humble and lowly in
his own conceit, when, in contrast with most of the
world, he alone can feel and act virtuously or understand
truly God's revelations?
</p>

<p>
The natural tendency to pride, self-sufficiency and
dogmatism is still further increased by the assumption
that humility consists mainly in a low opinion of <q>the
nature</q> with which we are endowed. Thus, while assuming
infallibility in one aspect, they still can claim
to be humble and lowly, because they abhor and despise
their depraved nature and its results in themselves.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, the most remarkable self-deception
is practiced in regard to their own Christian
graces. These all being supposed to spring from a
regenerated nature imparted by God, they disclaim
all honor or merit, and give all the glory to God, who
has wrought these graces from their dead and sinful
nature. By this method they imagine they attain a
true humility and lowliness of spirit.
</p>

<p>
But every man of great genius, and every woman
of uncommon beauty, understand as truly as the professedly
regenerated person, that their gifts are from
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
God, and are willing to give all the glory to him for
thus distinguishing them from their fellow-creatures.
And the ascription of all the power and glory to God
does not save the professedly regenerated person from
self-complacency and pride any more than it does the
genius or the beauty.
</p>

<p>
And yet we find religious writings abounding in
such disclaimers and ascriptions, which are evidently
regarded as proofs of humility and lowliness of spirit.
It is true that such expressions do often flow from
the hearts of the really humble and contrite; but the
fact that a person regards and acknowledges God as
the author of his own extraordinary gifts, that raise
him above his fellows, is no <emph>proof</emph> of humility, while
it is often so regarded.
</p>

<p>
In contrast to this tendency of the Augustinian
system, the common-sense view teaches that while our
nature is noble and perfect in construction&mdash;the embryo
image of its Maker&mdash;it is destitute of that knowledge,
experience and training, for which it is equally
dependent on God and on man. And as the requisite
knowledge can be gained only by the aid of those
minds around, whose happiness is affected by our conduct,
it is clear that a willingness to learn from any
quarter and to be told our mistakes by any person, is
the natural result of an earnest desire to find out and
obey the truth. And a consciousness of our own liabilities
to mistakes, and a certainty that there is no
one <q>that liveth and sinneth not,</q> tends to induce
compassionate sympathy for the failings of others, and
an indisposition to force opinions on them by any
other mode than calm statement and argument.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, an earnest desire for inquiry and
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
discussion is generated, which naturally leads to patient
investigation, courteous demeanor towards opponents,
and to all the graces that wait on a gentle,
humble and truth-loving spirit.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLI. Tendencies of the Two Systems in Regard to
Dogmatism, Persecution and Ecclesiastical
Tyranny.</head>

<p>
It has been shown that the Augustinian system,
teaching as it does man's depraved nature and destitution
of any principles of right guidance in his own
mind, makes him wholly dependent not only on revelations
from his Creator, but on infallible interpreters.
</p>

<p>
Thus we find that wherever this system became
dominant there has coëxisted the claim that <emph>the people</emph>
are not to decide, each one for himself, what are
the teachings of reason, experience and revelation as
to truth and duty. Instead of this, first it was popes
and councils, in which the laity had no voice; next,
as among the Puritans, it was the church, including
both the clergy and the regenerated portion of their
flocks.
</p>

<p>
From this resulted religious persecutions, in this
manner: Men are to obey God as their first duty.
<emph>The church</emph> is God's mouth-piece to interpret his commands
to mankind. If men refuse to obey God,
speaking through his church, they must be forced to
do so by pains and penalties. And as in view of eternal
happiness and eternal misery, all earthly interests
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
are as nothing, every temporal consideration must be
put out of account. Moreover, whoever leads men to
disobey the church and thus to disobey God, and so to
peril not only their own eternal welfare, but that of
others, commits a greater crime than is done by violating
any human ordinances. Therefore, the heaviest
penalties should be employed to enforce obedience
to the church, and the church must take precedence
of the civil government.
</p>

<p>
Thus it came to pass that the more sincere, conscientious
and benevolent a person was, while holding these
views, the more surely would he become a persecutor.
</p>

<p>
The pages of history give many mournful illustrations
of this truth. One of the most striking will be
here introduced.
</p>

<p>
Isabella of Spain, by whose generosity this western
world was discovered, was one of the most gentle,
conscientious, benevolent and lovely characters that
ever adorned a throne.
</p>

<p>
She was trained to believe the church to be the representative
of God on earth, and her father confessor,
Torquemada, the originator of the Inquisition, was the
guide of her conscience. By his commands the Inquisition
reared its horrid dungeons. By his counsel the
industrious, cultivated and chivalrous Moors, the most
useful of all her subjects, were driven from their native
soil. By his commands the Jews were brought
to the cruel alternative of giving up their religion or
relinquishing all that made life dear. And thus the
historian narrates this dreadful tale of religious persecution:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The experiment of conversion was tried upon the Jews, and
it utterly and totally failed. In the first place, their position in
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
Christian society was a source of continual discussion. <q>If we
admit them to public offices, we have gained nothing,</q> said the
mercantile classes. <q>If we exclude them,</q> said the clergy, <q>what
motive is held out for the rest to join us?</q> But as a religious experiment,
the failure was even more complete. The fathers were
nominal converts, and nominal converts the children continued to
be. Ostentatiously they attended mass; but in their own houses
their Sabbath was kept, their ritual was read, their psalms were
sung. Meantime, intercourse and intermarriage with Christians
became more fatally easy than it had been before. Shunned by
the middle classes, they intermarried with the 'blue blood' of the
nobility, they entered the priesthood, and ascended the highest
steps of the Catholic hierarchy. Nay, they became, more than
once, inquisitors, and wielded against their foes with cynical hatred
the terrors of the Holy Office. Of the Inquisition there is no space
to speak here;<note place='foot'>The extent to which Judaism had spread among the upper ranks
is strikingly shown by the fact that one of the first inquisitors, Peter
Arbues, was assassinated by a conspiracy formed of the chief officers
of the Arragonese government, who were most of them, according to
Llorente, of Jewish blood or connections. The Inquisition, however,
was odious on other grounds, as a royalist institution, like our Star
Chamber.&mdash;See Llorente's <hi rend='italic'>History of Inquisition</hi>.</note> sufficient to say that the <q>New Christians</q> were
the chief cause of its institution, and that during the eighteen
years that Torquemada held office, ten thousand persons were
burned alive.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But two thirds of the Jews of Spain had remained unconverted;
and with them the Inquisition had nothing to do; for
they were under special laws and under royal protection. But
Torquemada had not forgotten them. Working on the pride of
Ferdinand, on the conscience of Isabella, he persuaded them to
sign the celebrated Edict of Exile. They were to leave Spain in
three months. They were to take neither silver nor gold with
them. If it pleased God to change their hearts, the church
would most willingly receive them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ruinous alike to banisher and banished, this edict had cost a
struggle. Isaac Abarbenel, wealthy, learned, high in royal favor,
rushed into the queen's audience-chamber, on hearing what till
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
then had been carefully concealed from his nation, threw himself
at her feet, and doubtless won her over for the moment. To Ferdinand
he offered thirty thousand ducats. But, in the wavering
of debate, Torquemada appeared suddenly. <q>Judas,</q> he said,
<q>sold his master for thirty pieces. Your Majesties, it seems, want
thirty thousand. Here He is; take Him; and what ye do, do
quickly!</q> Dashing a crucifix on the table, he left them. The
omen was clear, and the die was cast.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>To the Jews one road of deliverance was still left. To renounce
the outward garb of their religion, never again to pass the threshold
of a synagogue, never to chant a Hebrew hymn nor keep a
Hebrew Sabbath; to change every household custom, to break
all the rules of life, dear from the nursery and clung to on the bed
of death; to repeat a false creed, to enter an idolatrous temple,
to kneel down with God's enemies;&mdash;this road was open, though
treading it they would have trampled on their fathers' tombs. Yet,
on the other hand, thousands had taken that course; and would
tell them that strict adherence to the laws of the land they lived
in, abstinence from all that might offend, performance of harmless
superstitions, bowing down for a season in the house of Rimmon,
that this was a course plainly marked out by Providence. The
loss, too, that they would suffer in exile was immense; and we
must estimate this loss before we can estimate the worth of those
who chose to suffer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>We have seen the Jews of France leave it, enter it, leave it
again, and count the value of their sojourn at exactly the price at
which reëntrance could be bought. It was a market-stall, a field
for acquisition; but it was not the seat of Jewish learning, it was
not the resting place of their fathers for many generations.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Now Spain was something more to them than this. It was
no foreign soil, passed and repassed with the indifference of a
stranger. They had lived there for twelve hundred years. They
had seen the Teutonic forest-creeds moulded and melted into the
new faith of Rome. They had seen the Ishmaelite sweep that faith
away. By him they had been welcomed as brothers. With him
they had lit the lamp of science when all the world was dark. Then
they had seen the Cross rise from the northern mountains, and the
Crescent wane and wane before it. By the kings of Christian Spain
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
their worth had been acknowledged; they had fostered their trade;
they had called them to their councils; they had befriended and
loved them. Persecution and jealousy had driven many of their
brethren to accept another creed; but the new Christians were
Jews still; they had married their daughters to the proudest nobles
of a race where the peasant was proud; and not a duke in all
Spain could despise them without despising his own mother's blood.
Spain, too, was the land where Jewish wisdom had unfolded and
blossomed. Their physicians and their astronomers were the first
in Europe. Their poets and their philosophers were eminent among
their nation. The psalms of Jehuda Halevi were sung in the synagogues
of the Rhine. Aben Esra had eclipsed the fame of the great
Eastern school of Pombeditha; above all, Spain claimed the son of
Maimon, the great prophet of the Exile, famed from the Seine to
the Euphrates as the second Moses.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Such, besides escape from utter ruin, were the temptations to
apostacy. And those who issued the decree fully hoped that
apostacy would have been its result. Every means was taken.
<q>In the public squares, in the synagogues, Catholic preachers thundered
forth invective against the Hebrew heresy.</q> They might
thunder&mdash;they were not heard.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>Come,</q> said their priests and elders, <q>let us strengthen ourselves
in our faith and in the teachings of our God, against the
voice of the oppressor, and the scorn of the enemy. If they destroy
us&mdash;well; if they will let us live&mdash;well; but we will not
depart from the Covenant, neither make our hearts froward; but
we will go forth in the name of the Lord our God, who saved our
fathers from Egypt, and brought them through the Red Sea.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The spirit of Moses and of Joshua rested on the aged rabbis,
and their words prevailed. Few in number and bold in cowardice
were those who yielded. They made ready for this second
Exodus where no Canaan glistened in the distance. Forced to
sell their possessions in three months, forbidden to sell them for
gold, they were glad to exchange large houses or estates for an
ass or mule, or for such trifling articles of travel as the wish to be
first at the spoiling might induce purchasers to supply.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Eastward, westward, northward&mdash;to Africa, to Portugal, to
Italy and the Levant,&mdash;half a million Jews went forth. Eighty
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
thousand sought shelter in Portugal, but did not find it. Thousands
fell into the hands of the barbarians of Fez. They were
sold for slaves; they were left to starve on desert isles; their
bodies, yet living, were ripped open for the hidden gold. Thus
writes Rabbi Josef:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>And there were among them who were cast into the isles of
the sea, a Jew and his old father, fainting from hunger, begging
bread; and there was none to break unto them in a strange country.
And the man went and sold his little son for bread, to restore
the soul of the old man; and when he returned to his father,
he found him dead; and he rent his clothes. And he went back
to the baker to take his son; but the baker would not give him
back; and he cried out with a sore and bitter cry for his son, but
there was none to deliver. All this befell us in the year Rabbim&mdash;for
the sons of the desolate are <q>Many</q>&mdash;yet have we not forgotten
thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. Hasten
to help us, O Lord! For thy sake we are killed all the day; we
are counted as sheep appointed for the slaughter. Make haste to
help us, O God of our salvation.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Or listen to the chronicler of Genoa, who saw them as they
drifted eastward:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><q>This expulsion,</q> he says, <q>seemed to me at first a praiseworthy
act, done in the cause and for the honor of God. Yet,
when we remember that they were not brute beasts after all, but
men made by God, surely it must be owned that some little cruelty
was shown. Their woes were very piteous to see. The first
who starved were the infants at the breast; then the mothers,
carrying their dead children till they fell down and died with
them. Many perished of cold and of squalor. Unused to the sea,
countless numbers died from sickness; many were drowned by
the sailors for their wealth; the poor, who could not otherwise pay
their passage, sold their children. Lean, pale, with eyes deep-sunken,
like ghosts from the dead, hardly moving enough to show
that they were alive, they came into our city to find shelter for
three days; for our ancient laws forbade a longer stay. Yet for
the repair of their ships, and for health's sake, a short respite was
granted. They were allowed to live on the Mole, while they
made ready for their long voyage eastward. Thus the winter
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
passed, and many of them died. The spring came, and ulcers
broke out that had been hitherto kept under by the cold, and all
that year there was a plague in that city.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This mournful narrative exhibits one of the most
sublime examples of religious faith and conscientious
self-sacrifice to what was deemed truth and duty in
the persecuted. At the same time, when the avaricious
Ferdinand relinquished thirty thousand ducats, and
the tender and benevolent Isabella turned a deaf ear to
such prayers and sufferings from her people, there can
be no doubt that conscience ruled the persecutors also.
Even Torquemada himself may have been acting from
the most conscientious and benevolent motives in all
the disastrous influences he brought to bear on his
royal mistress.
</p>

<p>
This passage of history also teaches that honesty,
and sincerity, and conscientiousness will not avail
without a <emph>knowledge of the truth</emph>. Nay, more; had
these persecutors been less conscientious, the natural
instincts of humanity or personal interests would have
mitigated or withheld the cruel doom.
</p>

<p>
It is in this light that we are enabled, in spite of
their mistakes in opinions, to look upon theologians
as among the noblest sufferers and confessors for what
they believed to be truth. From the time of Augustine
and Pelagius to the present day nothing can be
more clear than that the combatants on both sides were
actuated by a sincere love to God and to man, each believing,
as sincerely as did Saul of Tarsus, that in these
conflicts they were verily doing God service, and that
all they were called to suffer was for the true church
of God and the salvation of their fellow-men.
</p>

<p>
But the main purpose for which this record of history
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
now appears is to illustrate the natural tendency
of the Augustine theory in leading to dogmatism, persecution
and ecclesiastical tyranny.
</p>

<p>
The tendency of the common-sense system can not
be illustrated by history, for unfortunately Christendom
has never yet had an opportunity to test by a fair
experiment its true tendencies. We can only imagine
what would be the results were all ecclesiastical restraints
and teachings based on the Augustine theory
removed from our pulpit ministries, our hymns and
prayers, our religious literature, and, most of all, from
long established habits of thought and feeling.
</p>

<p>
Then all our religious organizations would have for
their leading aim, not to maintain some outward rite or
modes of organization, but to promote free discussion
for the discovery of truth and harmonious coöperation
to promote happiness according to the laws of
God.
</p>

<p>
Then the ministry of the Word would be committed
to men distinguished not only by natural endowments,
acquired knowledge and skill in debate, but
also ensamples to their flocks in the virtues of humility,
meekness, and a gentle and teachable spirit.
Then the points that would divide men into parties
would be chiefly <emph>practical</emph> questions, so that where no
agreement in opinion could be secured, each would
peaceably try a fair experiment and eventually bring
the results forward for the general good.
</p>

<p>
Then every individual would be free to protest
against all that he believes to be injurious and wrong,
in regard to individuals, to the family, to the church
and to the state, and be met in his efforts as a benefactor
rather than an opposer or an enemy.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLII. Tendencies of the Two Systems as Shown in
Controversy and Sects.</head>

<p>
It is the aim of this chapter to show that the chief
controversies and chief sects of Christendom have resulted
from the Angustinian system, and from attempts
to eliminate it from the system of common sense with
which it has been combined.
</p>

<p>
The dogma of a depraved nature consequent on
Adam's sin, was a philosophical theory introduced to
account for the prevailing sinfulness of the human race.
The attempt of Pelagius and his associates to oppose
this dogma, was met by civil and ecclesiastical power
and persecution. <q>And thus,</q> says the historian, <q>the
Gauls, Britons and Africans by their councils, and the
emperors by their edicts, demolished this sect in its infancy
and suppressed it entirely.</q>
</p>

<p>
For long ages after this, no attempt was made to
oppose the system based on this theory in any of its
branches. The doctrine that man, being so depraved
in nature as to be incapable of knowing or judging
aright, and having no standard of right and wrong
but express revelations from God, resulted in the unresisted
claim of popes and church councils as the only
authorized interpreters of the Bible.
</p>

<p>
Then began the powerful influence of <emph>education</emph>.
Every child was trained to believe the doctrine of a
depraved nature as a part of the word of God, to be
received with unquestioning submission. Thus the
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
most powerful influences were enlisted to enchain the
feeble and plastic mind of childhood at the starting-point
of thought and reason. It was also taught by
theologians to all the young ecclesiastics as a <emph>system</emph>,
thus adding a new force to early educational training
by the authority of the church, with all its solemn
and awful sanctions.
</p>

<p>
The idea that every man is to receive the teachings
of Christ, uncontrolled by church authority, as <emph>he</emph> understands
them, and that he is a Christian just so far
as he <emph>understands aright</emph> and <emph>obeys</emph> them, found no advocates
for long centuries. Meantime the ecclesiastics,
as the only infallible interpreters of God's word, and
the only source by which to gain regenerating influences,
abused the influence thus acquired, to build up
the awful prelatic power that ruled Christendom for
ages. At last, with many other abominations, the regular
sale of indulgences to commit all manner of crimes
at fixed prices, brought intolerable follies and crimes
to a crisis.
</p>

<p>
Then Luther and his compeers arose and waged
war, not against the root of these evils, but against
those inevitable branches, the infallibility of church
interpretations and the substitution of outward creeds,
rites and forms for the spiritual principle of love to
God and man exhibited by obedience to the Creator's
laws.
</p>

<p>
Luther claimed that he and all men were bound to
interpret the Bible for themselves, and not to submit
their judgment to any pope, council or ecclesiastical
power. And he claimed that the Bible teaches that
man is to be saved [justified], not by outward forms,
but <emph>by faith in Jesus Christ</emph>. But retaining the doctrine
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
of man's ruined and helpless <emph>nature</emph>, his ideas of
<emph>faith</emph> and of the <emph>mode</emph> of attaining it, were vague and
conflicting. Thus originated the long conflict between
Catholic and Protestant Christianity, involving some of
the most bloody and cruel wars and persecutions that
ever afflicted humanity.
</p>

<p>
Next came Arminius and his associates, who, still
clinging to the fatal root of a totally depraved nature,
labored to devise <emph>some</emph> way in which, in spite of this
ruin, man could do something to secure regeneration
from God. For, as shown in the early chapters, Calvinism
maintained that man was utterly helpless, and
that <emph>all</emph> the doings of the unregenerate were sin and
only sin, and therefore utterly unavailing in gaining
regenerating aid from God. Hence originated the
long conflict between Calvinism and Arminianism,
which has been continued to this day.
</p>

<p>
Both these schools of divinity rested on the dogma
of an entirely depraved nature, but their tendencies
were diverse.
</p>

<p>
Calvinism, maintaining the utter helplessness of
man, tended to despairing inefficiency. If man really
could do nothing, why should he attempt any thing
to secure salvation?
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, Arminianism, promising help
through certain forms, rites and influences conveyed
by ecclesiastics, tended to a reliance on rites and
forms. If man is to be saved by these instrumentalities
and can do nothing himself except through them,
then, these being secured, the natural tendency must
be to rest in them.
</p>

<p>
These two diverse tendencies finally resulted in an
equal torpor and indifference to religion in both parties,
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
which was interrupted on the Arminian side by
Wesley and Whitfield, and on the Calvinistic side by
Jonathan Edwards.
</p>

<p>
Wesley and his co-laborers taught anew the Protestant
doctrine of man's independence of ecclesiastical
interpretations and church forms, and the necessity
of an immediate and higher spiritual life. From
his efforts and those of Whitfield originated the great
Methodist denomination in Great Britain and America.
</p>

<p>
In this sect is carried out the theory of regeneration,
not as a slow process of educational training,
but as an instantaneous change, manifested in excited
sensibilities. As the depravity consequent on Adam's
sin consists in the <q>deprivation</q> of God's Spirit,
and regeneration is the return of this gift, to be secured
by prayer and other <q>means of grace,</q> we find
their prayers, hymns and preaching all conformed to
this theory. They gain grace when the Spirit comes,
and when it departs they <q>fall from grace.</q>
</p>

<p>
While Wesley and Whitfield, in Great Britain, appealed
directly to the people in combatting the Arminian
tendency to forms and laxness, Jonathan Edwards
addressed the leaders of metaphysical thought
in his profound and acute writings. He attempted to
meet the universal paralysis consequent on the Calvinistic
doctrine of man's inability, amounting almost
to the loss of a consciousness of personal freedom.
</p>

<p>
His aim was to restore to man a sense of ability and
responsibility. Thus originated his theory of <emph>natural
ability</emph> and <emph>moral inability</emph>, which amounts simply to
this: that man has <emph>natural</emph> power to obey all that
God requires, but that he so lacks <emph>moral ability</emph>, on
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
account of his depraved nature, that it is certain that
he never will make a truly virtuous choice till he is
regenerated, and regeneration is not to be secured by
any unregenerated doings.
</p>

<p>
From this resulted the division into the <emph>old</emph> and
<emph>new-school Calvinistic</emph> parties in the Congregational
and Presbyterian churches.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, the New Haven divines, while in some of
their writings they held exactly the views of President
Edwards, and claimed to have made no innovation,
in others they came exactly to the Pelagian
ground, maintaining that man <q>has not a depraved
nature <emph>in any sense</emph>, nor a corrupt nature, much less
a sinful nature,</q> <q>but rather that in nature he is like
God.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is the same doctrine as was held by Pelagius,
and if it were only carried out consistently and not
contradicted, would be the entire elimination, root
and branch, of the Augustinian system.
</p>

<p>
From this resulted a theological controversy that
has agitated the Presbyterian and Congregational
churches for the last thirty years.
</p>

<p>
There are two denominations which all the Augustinian
sects agree in excluding from their fellowship
as not entitled to the name of Christian sects, which
have had great influence in undermining the hold of
the Augustinian theory. These are the <emph>Universalists</emph>
and the <emph>Unitarians</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The former do not formally deny the Augustinian
theory of a depraved nature consequent on Adam's
sin, but leaving it undisputed, gain great influence by
it. They allow that God has power to restore man to
his original perfectness, and then maintain that the
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
very idea of a benevolent being, who is the loving
parent of all his creatures, makes it certain that he
will do so. For, as shown before, our only idea of a
benevolent being is, that he <emph>wills</emph> to do <emph>all in his power</emph>
to secure that which will make the most happiness
with the least evil. As, therefore, all the Augustinian
sects concede that God has power to make all minds
perfect at the first, and to regenerate all minds that are
ruined through the sin of Adam, Universalists maintain
that the very idea of the Creator as a benevolent
being necessarily involves the certainty that he will
in the end, bring all the creatures he has made to a
state of perfectness, both in mental <emph>construction</emph> and
mental <emph>action</emph>. This argument is unanswerable, and
the people very extensively are led to so regard it,
and to adopt this view of the future state of our race.
</p>

<p>
The question, with this sect, all turns on whether
it is possible in the nature of things for God to construct
mind on a more perfect pattern than that of
the human mind; and whether it is possible, in the
nature of things, to make the best possible system
of minds that are free agents, and yet save <emph>all</emph> of
them from perpetuated disobedience to the laws of
that system and the consequent suffering of the natural
penalties.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the common-sense system
teaches that it is not possible, so that it must be by
revelation only, that man could gain such a doctrine
as the eventual perfect holiness and happiness of the
whole human race.
</p>

<p>
While the Universalists gain great power by not
contesting the Augustinian dogma, the Unitarians
have taken the ground of a full recognition of the
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
Pelagian doctrine of the perfect <emph>construction</emph> of the
<emph>nature</emph> of man. At the same time they have, as a
sect, almost universally adopted the Universalist doctrine
of the eventual salvation of the whole of our
race.
</p>

<p>
Both these sects have embraced men of great popular
talents, who have widely influenced the public
mind, in their attempts to lessen confidence in the doctrines
and sects based on the Augustinian theory.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, in the scientific world, mental philosophy
has made great progress in clear analysis and
accurate definitions. The Scotch school of metaphysicians,
headed by Reid and Stewart, have clearly developed
and established in a popular form, the <emph>principles
of reason</emph> and <emph>common sense</emph>; though as professors
in a Calvinistic university and community, they never
ventured to apply these principles to the investigation
of religious theories as to the <q>depraved nature</q>
of the human mind. They passed over the whole
question in utter silence.
</p>

<p>
Still more recently has been developed the system
of Phrenology, which is based on the <emph>constitutional diversities</emph>
in mental faculties. This system has effectively
warred on the theological theory of implanted evil
propensities, by teaching that every faculty, when developed
and regulated aright, tends to the best good of
the race, so that the extinction of any faculty or propensity
would not be an improvement, but rather an
injury to the constitution of mind.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, by the influence of our schools,
our colleges, our pulpits, our popular lectures and our
wide-spread periodicals, both religious and secular,
the mind of all classes has been rising to a larger development,
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
and to clearer and more discriminating
views of mental and moral science in every department.
Thus the people are gradually throwing off
the chains of ecclesiastical authority and assuming
that liberty of thought and action, which their Almighty
Father designed as the chief birth-right of all
his intelligent offspring.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLIII. Practical Tendencies of the Two Systems.</head>

<p>
In the preceding pages it has been shown that the
common-sense system presents an intelligible, practical
and consistent standard of right and wrong, by
which we can judge clearly of the character and conduct,
both of the Creator and of his creatures.
</p>

<p>
The mind of the Creator existing from all eternity,
independently of his own will, is the pattern of perfectness
in the construction of mind. He has formed
and sustains a system fitted to his own perfections.
The chief end of this system is happiness-making
on the greatest possible scale. In order to this, his
<emph>laws</emph>, by which the most possible good with the least
possible evil will be secured, must be discovered and
obeyed.
</p>

<p>
Accordingly, all that tends to secure happiness
without evil is right, and all that needlessly lessens
or destroys happiness is wrong. Every effort to discover
the laws of God and to obey them is right and
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
pleasing to him as promoting his chief desire and
great end. This view furnishes a foundation for clear
conceptions in every practical question of right and
wrong. What is <emph>for the best</emph> as discovered by reason
and experience? This is the great question, when
we have no direct revelation from God. And even
when revelation intervenes, it must be only in regard
to <emph>general rules</emph>, leaving it still a matter of experience
and discussion in <emph>applying</emph> these rules to the multitudes
of varying cases in human experience. Thus,
for example, a command to be honest toward all,
leaves innumerable questions to be settled as to what
<emph>is</emph> honest and fair in the multiplied cases arising between
man and man.
</p>

<p>
But we always have the great principle of common
sense to guide us, that <emph>whatever is for the best is
right</emph>, leaving it for reason and experience to settle
what is and what is not for the best.
</p>

<p>
But in contrast the Augustinian system, in many
ways, tends to becloud the mind in regard to practical
questions of right and wrong.
</p>

<p>
Thus the assumption that there are no principles
in the human mind that enable us to judge of the
character and conduct of God; that we have no means
of learning what is the object or end for which all
things are made; that man is so depraved as to be
disqualified to know what is right and wrong, except
as taught by revelations from God; and at the same
time disqualified to interpret such revelations until regenerated,
or by the help of a priesthood; all this
tends to create the feeling of incertitude as to any
question of right and wrong, while the abuses of
priestly interpretations have so often set the Bible in
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
opposition to our moral sense and common sense as
greatly to increase the evil.
</p>

<p>
Add to this, the assumption that there is no true
virtue in any acts of the unregenerate, but that all
their moral deeds are sin, and only sin, and the perplexity
is increased as to what is right and what is
wrong moral action.
</p>

<p>
Again, the fact that salvation from eternal misery
is possible only to those who have gained a new <q>nature,</q>
while it is often seen that some of those received
into churches as having this new nature, are not so
charitable, amiable, just or honest, as many who are
not thus admitted, and the mind is still more beclouded
as to the real nature of right and wrong in
practical conduct.
</p>

<p>
Again, the manner in which this new nature is
recognized by those appointed to decide who are regenerated
and who are not, in order to admit to or
exclude from churches, still farther increases the difficulty.
The questions often propounded on such occasions
relate mainly to certain states of feeling toward
God or Christ, or to certain doctrines involved in the
Augustinian theory. If replies to these are satisfactory,
the candidate is pronounced regenerated and received
to the church.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, ever since the days of Luther, the doctrine
of <q>justification by faith,</q> in opposition to <q>salvation
by works,</q> has been assumed to be the foundation
principle, both of Protestantism and of true piety,
while there has been great indistinctness of conception
as to the true meaning of these terms. At the time
of the great conflict between Romanism and the Reformers,
the grand evil to be combated was a reliance
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
for salvation on the prescribed outward rites and forms
of the church without any reference to an internal
spiritual principle. The attempt of the Reformers
was to substitute for these outward forms that spiritual
principle which consists in a <emph>ruling purpose to discover
and to obey the will of God according to the teachings
of Christ</emph>, whom they regarded as <q>God manifest in the
flesh.</q> They recognized the fact that no man ever
did or ever could live without some violations of the
laws of God, so that no man could be saved on the
ground of perfect obedience to law. Instead of this
they assumed that man could gain eternal life by <q>becoming
a new creature in Christ Jesus,</q> meaning by
this that <q>new life</q> which consists in ceasing to live
to please self, and living to please God in Christ as
the chief end of life, by earnest conformity to his will
as learned either by reason and experience or by the
Bible.
</p>

<p>
This is what they intended by faith in Jesus Christ.
And the opposite doctrine of <q>salvation by works</q>
was that which the Romish church was urging, viz.,
conformity to her outward rites and forms.
</p>

<p>
But in process of time, and for want of clear conceptions
and clear teaching, it came about that the
real good works, commanded by Christ, as a part of
the love of God required, were confounded with the
rites and forms, and outward deeds commanded by
the church, and which may be performed without
the principle of love to Christ, which is exhibited
in obedience to his teachings. The result has been
that the teachings and writings of many Protestants
often make the impression that the good works
of a pure morality are of no avail and often very
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
much in the way of a man's final salvation. Thus
has arisen the distinction often made between good
<emph>moral</emph> men and good <emph>religious</emph> men. This classification
rests entirely on the Augustinian dogma, that until the
depraved nature received from Adam is regenerated,
all the moral acts of men, however virtuous and excellent,
are <q>sin, and sin only.</q>
</p>

<p>
The true meaning of <q>justification by faith and not
by works,</q> is that men are not to be saved by <emph>actually
finding out</emph> in all possible cases what is for the best and
then <emph>doing</emph> it, which no man ever did or ever can do
without mistake; but rather by <emph>a ruling purpose to discover
and to obey</emph> all the laws of the Creator. This last
is the <emph>spiritual</emph> principle in opposition to mere <emph>outward
acts</emph>. It is <emph>practical</emph> faith in God which is to save the
soul of man. All, therefore, who believe Christ to be
God are <q>justified</q> by <emph>faith</emph> in Christ. That is, they are
regarded and treated as just and righteous, when they
have this internal principle of obedience to Christ,
even though they are never free from actual transgression
of law, either known or unknown. Thus the
ancient patriarchs were saved by faith in Christ, he
being the God of the old dispensation as much as of
the new.
</p>

<p>
That this is the sense in which the Reformers used
the words <q>justification, or salvation by faith,</q> in
opposition to <q>salvation by works,</q> may easily be
proved. At the same time, it is as easy to show that
they used this term in another sense also. But at
this time no reference will be made to any other use
than the one under consideration. Their other use
of this term in reference to the atonement of Jesus
Christ will be referred to hereafter.
</p>

<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>

<p>
The preceding exhibits the several ways in which
the Angustinian theory tends to becloud the mind in
regard to practical questions of right and wrong.
These tendencies have been more or less counteracted
by the implanted principles of reason. Still more
have they been rectified by the steady and clear
teachings of the Bible, which never, when truly interpreted,
contradict either the moral sense or common
sense of man, but rather strengthen them and
guide them aright.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLIV. Tendencies of the Two Systems in the Training
of Children.</head>

<p>
It has been shown that the common-sense system
results from the implanted principles of mind, so that
no person can be entirely free from its influence.
</p>

<p>
The Augustinian system has also been shown in its
Calvinistic and Arminian tendencies.
</p>

<p>
The Calvinistic form, making it certain that, owing
to the depravity of nature consequent on Adam's sin,
every moral act is sin and only sin, while there is no
revealed mode of securing regeneration, leads to hopeless
inefficiency and neglect of religious advantages.
The Arminian form, maintaining the efficacy of certain
rites and ceremonies in securing regeneration,
tends to a disastrous dependence on outward observances.
</p>

<p>
Those parents who are trained in the Calvinistic
school, usually <emph>begin</emph> education more or less on the
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
common-sense theory that children can and do please
God when they are obedient, gentle, kind, self-denying
and conscientious. Prayers and hymns are
also taught to the little ones that make this impression.
</p>

<p>
But when advancing years bring the pulpit and
other Calvinistic influences to bear, these impressions,
more or less, fade away, and are followed by the
depressing feeling that nothing that a child does is
either good or pleasing to the heavenly Father till
the <q>wicked heart</q> is changed by God, and that there
is no definite, practical mode of securing this change.
The consequence, in many cases, is, that all prayer
and all attention to religious instruction ceases, and
a desperate course of worldliness and departure from
all recognition of God ensues. In other cases, the
natural result of this Augustinian theory is more or
less counteracted by conscience, common sense and
the Bible.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, the Arminian view of the efficacy
of rites and means of grace sanctioned by God as
the mode of securing regeneration, has led to great
stress on the use of those rites and forms. The Catholic
and a portion of the Episcopal church, have taught
that the rite of baptism was the appointed mode of
remedying the depravity engendered from Adam.
And so indispensable was it deemed to the salvation
of infants, that not only laymen, but women were allowed
to administer this rite at the approach of death,
when no priest could be obtained, lest the infant soul
should go to endless perdition with the taint of Adam's
sin unremoved.
</p>

<p>
There have been great dissensions in the Episcopal
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
church as to the efficacy of baptism. Some have
taught that regeneration was imparted by this rite.
Others have taught that this rite secured the implanting
of <q>a seed,</q> or some new mysterious principle,
which if cherished and cultivated by the church, would
result in Christian character. Those who hold this
view, rely chiefly on the training of children in the
church as the appointed mode of securing their salvation.
</p>

<p>
That branch of the Arminian school which left the
Episcopal church under Wesley and his associates,
were driven off by the laxity and want of spiritual
life consequent on these tendencies to reliance on rites
and forms. In place of this, they urged the doctrine
of instantaneous regeneration, to be gained by certain
means of grace. According to these teachers, regeneration
consists in the return of God's Spirit to the
soul, which is withheld in consequence of Adam's sin.
The tendency of this view was to lessen reliance on
educational training and to exalt the importance of
other means of grace by which regeneration seemed
to be secured, and to which the Bible, as was claimed,
promised success.
</p>

<p>
Thus, in the Arminian sects, where the efficacy of
rites and forms by a regularly ordained and authoritative
priesthood has been relinquished, educational
training has conformed more to the Calvinistic view.
As eternal salvation depends on securing regeneration,
every thing is made secondary to those methods by
which regeneration is to be gained.
</p>

<p>
The Episcopal Arminians, therefore, depend more
on educating the young aright, and have little dependence
on revivals, while the Methodist Arminians look
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
less to education and more to revivals and other modes
of securing religious excitement.
</p>

<p>
But the foundation difficulty alike of the Calvinists,
the Episcopal Arminians and the Methodist Arminians,
is the assumption that <emph>regeneration of a ruined nature</emph>
is the thing to be sought, both by children and
by adults, as the indispensable prerequisite to salvation,
and that <q>the means of grace</q> are not for the
training and development of a perfect nature, but to
gain from God the cure of a ruined and helpless one.
</p>

<p>
In contrast to this, the common-sense system recognizes
all that is practical in any of the three methods.
It teaches that man's <emph>nature</emph> is perfect, and yet that
he is utterly helpless without the <emph>knowledge</emph>, <emph>training</emph>
and <emph>motives</emph>, for which he is dependent alike on God
and on man. It teaches that this nature can be
trained to <q>a new life</q> by educational instrumentalities
and by a slow and gradual process. At the
same time it teaches, that when men have lived a
worldly life there may be a <emph>sudden</emph> change of character
by <emph>voluntarily</emph> commencing a life of love and
obedience to God, in place of a life of unregulated
self-indulgence.
</p>

<p>
Since the days of Pelagius and Augustine, there
has never been any large body of Christians who have
trained children on the common-sense system dissevered
from the Augustinian theory. This experiment
is yet to be tried before its full and proper tendency
can be truly developed.
</p>

<p>
The Unitarian sect, who reject the Augustinian
dogma, also reject some of the fundamental principles
of the common-sense system, especially that on which
the whole system of moral and religious duty and motive
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
rests, <emph>the dangers of the race</emph> in the invisible world,
and the <emph>power of motive</emph> secured by <q>God manifest in
the flesh</q> as the long-suffering and self-denying Creator,
coming to aid his creatures by his teaching, sympathy,
example, and abounding love.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLV. The People Rejecting the Augustinian System.&mdash;Position
of Theologians.</head>

<p>
It is the object of what follows to present the
evidence that <emph>the people</emph> are rejecting the Augustinian
system, while they are retaining the system
of common sense, as that alone which is taught in
the Bible.
</p>

<p>
Preliminary to this, a brief statement of the prominent
points of these systems, where their antagonism
is most practical and apparent, will be allowed.
</p>

<p>
The Augustinian system teaches that on account of
Adam's sin, man is born with a <emph>nature</emph> so <emph>totally depraved</emph>,
that he never performs any truly virtuous acts
till this nature is regenerated; that the true church
of God on earth consists only of those who are thus
regenerated; and that a visible church consists of an
organization of persons who profess to possess a nature
that has been re-created, so that they perform truly
virtuous acts, as the unregenerated never do.
</p>

<p>
In opposition to this, the common-sense system
teaches that man is born with a perfect nature, so that
he can and does act virtuously without any change in
this nature; also that the true church of God on earth
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
consists of all those whose chief end and earnest purpose
is to discover and to obey all his laws; and a
visible church consists of any who associate by some
outward organization to aid each other in attempts to
discover and to obey the laws of God.
</p>

<p>
The evidence that the people are rejecting the former,
and assuming the latter view as that which is
taught in the Bible, will now be presented under
these heads:
</p>

<p>
The present position of theologians;
</p>

<p>
The state of the church;
</p>

<p>
The position of the pastors of churches;
</p>

<p>
The state of popular education;
</p>

<p>
The position of woman;
</p>

<p>
The position of Young America;
</p>

<p>
The position of the religious and secular press.
</p>

<div>
<head>Present Position of Theologians.</head>

<p>
In attempting to portray the present state of the
theological world, it is needful first to distinguish between
a class which may distinctively be termed theologians
and the much larger class which are pastors
of the people.
</p>

<p>
The two classes are so commingled that it would be
impossible to draw any line so exact as to arrange all
in these two classes; for sometimes the same person is
both theologian and pastor. Still there is foundation
for classification as distinct as ordinarily exists in regard
to other professions where men combine diverse
pursuits.
</p>

<p>
In attempting this classification, it must be noticed
that the religious world is divided into great
denominations, each having its theological schools, its
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
colleges, its theological magazines and its religious
newspapers.
</p>

<p>
All these are conducted by men whose business is
not that of pastors, and yet a great majority of whom
were educated for this office by a regular theological
training. Meantime, their position, professional reputation
and daily bread depend on maintaining the
particular peculiarities in doctrine and practice of a
given sect. By this is meant, that should they publicly
avow a renunciation of the peculiarities that distinguish
their sect, they would suffer in the public estimation
of their supporters, and be immediately removed
from their professional employment. It is this
class who are usually among the chief leaders of each
denomination, and who therefore are exposed to all the
difficulties and temptations which beset those whose
power, influence, profession and pecuniary support are
more or less connected with a <emph>conservative</emph> course in all
matters of religious opinion&mdash;difficulties and dangers
to which a pastor is much less exposed, so long as he
maintains his hold on the confidence and affection of
his people, who are his chief protection against theological
persecution of any kind.
</p>

<p>
The first class depend on a whole denomination for
reputation and a livelihood; the last class depend
chiefly on their own people. The first class, on every
practical question, must regard the views and opinions
of a sect, as leaders and guardians of the interests of
a great organization, whose very existence depends on
the dominance of certain opinions. The latter class
must chiefly regard the highest spiritual good of the
souls committed to their care.
</p>

<p>
Thus, for example, the Baptist theological professors,
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
and editors of religious periodicals, must maintain
that baptism by immersion is the only scriptural mode
of admission to the visible church of God and to the
sacrament, or give up their influence, reputation and
professional livelihood. And they must sustain the
organized interests of that sect as its most trusted and
talented leaders. Moreover, the very existence of the
sect and of their position as its leaders, depend on the
maintenance of this tenet, for it is this alone that separates
them from the Congregational sect.
</p>

<p>
In like manner, the Congregational theological professor
and editor must maintain that form of church
organization or give up his post. And so the Presbyterian,
Episcopal and Methodist theological professors
and editors are equally bound.
</p>

<p>
This representation does not necessarily imply any
thing invidious. If it is regarded as a duty to keep
up the sectarian divisions, which, as has been shown,
all result from the Augustinian dogma, then men must
be supported to do it by theological schools and periodicals.
And when men are put into positions for
the express purpose of sustaining the peculiar views
of a sect, it is not honest for them to hold these positions
after they can no longer conscientiously do the
work they are hired to perform.
</p>

<p>
But each pastor is the leader of his flock; and their
opinions and practices are more or less at his control
as their religious teacher. And so long as he can
carry his people with him he is independent of every
other ecclesiastical power. True, he may be censured,
deposed and excluded from a given sect or party, but
his people only have to declare themselves independent,
and that they choose to retain him as their religious
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
teacher, and no one can harm him as to his professional
employment or his support.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is that the pastors of churches have fewer of
those difficulties to meet which restrain the chief theological
leaders of a sect.
</p>

<p>
We are now prepared to notice the present position
of theologians in this country.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the chief theological conflicts,
since the days of Augustine, and also the chief
sects, have resulted from attempts to throw off the
dogma introduced by him in some one of its developments.
Thus the conflict headed by Luther was
against the substitution of external rites and forms
resulting from man's helpless depravity for an internal
principle of love and obedience.
</p>

<p>
The conflict commenced by Arminius was to maintain
man's ability to do something by his own efforts
to gain eternal life, in opposition to the utter inability
taught by Calvinism.
</p>

<p>
The conflict commenced by Wesley and his associates,
was to rouse men from a resting in outward
rites and forms and educational training, by
making instantaneous regeneration a practicable aim,
and one to be secured by the use of <q>the means of
grace.</q>
</p>

<p>
The conflict commenced by President Edwards was
to remedy the Calvinistic tendency to hopeless inefficiency
and waiting for God to regenerate, by insisting
on man's ability to obey all that God requires.
</p>

<p>
The conflict led by the New Haven school of divines,
was, in fact, an attempt to cut up the Augustinian
system by the root, in maintaining that sin
consists in the <emph>wrong action</emph> of a right nature, and
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
not in a depraved nature and its inevitable results.
</p>

<p>
All these controversies have been carried on, more
and more, in the audience of <emph>the people</emph>, who, in the
meantime, have been continually advancing in mental
culture and knowledge.
</p>

<p>
Especially has this been the case in this country,
where religion has been freed from civil restraints.
Several of the religious sects have been so divided on
these matters as to involve civil suits to settle questions
of property, thus bringing theologians and lawyers
on to the same arena. And thus discussions
on theological points were reported in secular papers.
</p>

<p>
This was the case in the rending of the Presbyterian
church into the Old and New-school sections. During
this controversy, some of the most honored and talented
of the clergy were suspended from their pulpit
duties and threatened with dismission from theological
professorships, solely on the charge of denying certain
points of doctrine of the Augustinian system. And
the highest judicature of the nation was called to decide
whether the men thus charged had, or had not
so departed from orthodox creeds as to warrant the
loss of place and income.
</p>

<p>
In this discussion, the endowments of colleges, of
theological schools, and of church property, were so
at stake, that the laymen all over the land were obliged
to inquire into and understand the merits of a discussion
strictly metaphysical and theological.
</p>

<p>
In Massachusetts, at one time, the whole State was
excited by the question whether there were any other
<emph>churches</emph> except the <emph>congregations</emph> that worshiped together
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
and supported the minister. This question
was argued before the highest court of the State, and
decided in the negative, while for years the controversy
was prolonged.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, the study of mental science has been introduced
into both colleges and schools all over the
land, and the sons, and even the daughters of our
farmers and mechanics, have gained clearer and more
discriminating views on such subjects than can now
be found in the writings of Aristotle, Plato, and the
wisest men of past ages.
</p>

<p>
Phrenology, also, has drawn maps of the mental
faculties, so that even the senses have been trained to
aid in metaphysics.
</p>

<p>
The pulpit, the press and public lecturers now, when
they refer to the <emph>intellect</emph>, the <emph>susceptibilities</emph>, the <emph>will</emph>,
<emph>the moral powers</emph>, and use other metaphysical terms,
are understood by all.
</p>

<p>
In short, the human mind has developed in all directions,
until it is impossible any longer to conceal
absurdities under cover of hard names and metaphysical
abstrusities, especially when the practical concerns
of this life, as well as the life to come, are equally involved.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, the most vigorous and acute minds in
the various opposing sects and theological schools,
have been exhibiting, in magazines and newspapers,
the difficulties and absurdities each finds in the creed
and teaching of all who differ, while it is the laymen
who read and pay for these periodicals. In these, and
many other ways, the discussions which once were confined
to metaphysicians and theologians, have come
before the people, and the Augustinian system has
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
been more and more clearly exhibited as contrary to
the moral sense and common sense of mankind.
</p>

<p>
A few years since, Dr. Edward Beecher published
the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi>, in which, with a calm and Christian
spirit and in a popular form, was set forth the difficulties
consequent on the Augustinian system, which
for ages have agitated all Christendom.
</p>

<p>
In this work, it is shown that there are <q>principles
of honor and right</q> which all theologians agree in
maintaining that God must and does regard and obey;
that these principles are violated by God on the supposition
that he has brought mankind into being in
this world with a depraved nature; and finally, that
all theories as yet invented by theologians to relieve
the Creator from such an imputation are failures, except
the theory, which is there presented, of <emph>a pre-existent
state</emph>, according to which, mankind were created
with perfect natures, which they ruined by sinning,
and came into this life to be restored to their former
perfect state.
</p>

<p>
Much that appears in the early portion of this work
is from this source. Still more has been gained from
that work in the clear manner in which it is there
proved, that the Bible does not teach that the sin of
Adam had any effect on <q>the nature</q> of the human
race, and that the interpretation given to the passage
in Romans v., which is the chief one claimed as teaching
this doctrine, not only has been interpreted wrong,
but is contrary to the rendering of the whole Christian
world from the apostles to Augustine.
</p>

<p>
In other words, the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi> came before <emph>the
people</emph> with the claim, that the Augustinian theory of
a depraved nature consequent on the sin of Adam, as
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
taught by all theologians of the great Catholic and
Protestant sects, is contrary to the moral sense of mankind
and entirely unsupported by the Bible.
</p>

<p>
This work was read, not only by theologians and
pastors, but by intelligent laymen, to an extent never
known before of a strictly theological work.
</p>

<p>
And what was the ground taken by theologians of
all schools? They were bound to show to the people,
in opposition to this work, if they could, that this
Augustinian dogma <emph>was not</emph> contrary to the moral
sense of mankind, and that it <emph>was</emph> taught in the Bible.
</p>

<p>
But not a single attempt of this kind has ever been
made. This universal <emph>silence</emph> is as direct a confession
of inability to reply as ever was known in the theological
world. All that ever has been attempted has
been, to show that the theory of a preëxistent state,
offered by that author, affords little or no relief, and
is without scriptural authority.
</p>

<p>
The words of a distinguished theologian and editor
of a theological quarterly, addressed to the writer, express
the case exactly: <q>Your brother has succeeded
in throwing us all into the ditch, but he has shown us
no way to get out.</q>
</p>

<p>
That is to say, so long as the doctrine of a <emph>depraved
nature</emph> that insures <q>sin, and only sin,</q> in every unregenerate
mind, is maintained, there is no <emph>satisfactory</emph>
way yet devised of proving the wisdom and benevolence
of God, by the concessions of theologians themselves.
</p>

<p>
At the same time, the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi>, in removing
the chief passage in the Bible relied on for proving
that <emph>in consequence of Adam's sin</emph> the nature of all men
has become depraved, has equally removed the evidence
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
most relied on to prove that there is any such
<emph>depravity of nature</emph> taught in the Bible at all.
</p>

<p>
This universal, tacit concession of theologians of all
schools, in reference to this famous passage of Scripture,
had no little influence in bringing before the
public the volume entitled <hi rend='italic'>Common Sense Applied to
Religion, or the Bible and the People</hi> before referred to.
</p>

<p>
In this work, the <emph>principles of common sense</emph> and the
<emph>nature or construction of mind</emph> are by the author exhibited
more at large than in this volume. And the
common-sense system of religion as thus educed is
also set forth, though less completely and extensively
than in this work.
</p>

<p>
The laws of language and interpretation also are
introduced into that work for the purpose of showing
(in the second volume not yet published) that the common-sense
system is also taught in the Bible.
</p>

<p>
But preliminary to this, it was seen to be important
to apply the principles of common sense to prove that
the Bible is a collection of <emph>reliable</emph> records, of <emph>reliable</emph>
revelations from the Creator to mankind.
</p>

<p>
It was seen also, that if the Augustinian system is
really taught in these writings, <emph>it is impossible to prove
them to be reliable revelations</emph> from God, as is set forth
at large in chapter 34 of this present volume.
</p>

<p>
For this reason, in the Addenda to the first volume
the Augustinian theory is introduced, and very briefly
shown to be, not only contrary to the common sense
and moral sense of mankind, but also without support
from the Bible.
</p>

<p>
Before publication, this work was sent to a large
number of those regarded as among the most acute
and profound theologians of the several classes described
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
herein, with the request that if they detected
inaccuracies as to <emph>facts</emph>, or <emph>fallacious reasonings</emph>, they
would point them out for revision. In making this
appeal it was stated that the writer had little taste for
metaphysics or theology, and had been driven to
them in the stress of great sorrow and under a tremendous
pressure of motive as narrated in the Introduction.
</p>

<p>
Several of those thus addressed, returned criticisms
and remarks in reply. The book was then issued, in
which the author appeared not in the attitude of a
teacher, but as an inquirer. And the closing inquiries
were:
</p>

<p>
Are these principles of common sense accepted?
</p>

<p>
Is <emph>the system</emph> of natural religion evolved by their aid
accepted?
</p>

<p>
Is the Augustinian theory of depravity, as tried by
these principles and the rules of interpretation, supported
either by reason or the Bible?
</p>

<p>
The work, as thus revised, was again sent to these
same theologians, and it was noticed in most of the periodicals.
</p>

<p>
The result was the same as was accorded to the arguments
of the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi>. Some criticisms on
style, language and minor matters appeared in the notices
of the book, but the above main questions thus
submitted were met with an ominous <emph>silence</emph>.
</p>

<p>
None of the theologians of any school has pointed
out any misstatement of any specific fact; nor have
they attempted to dispute the principles of common
sense set forth, or the results of their application in
the <emph>system</emph> thus evolved. Nor have they attempted
to show that the passage in the Bible on which
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
the Augustinian theory chiefly rests, is sanctioned
by the interpretations of the apostolic ages, or that
the interpretation of it in the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi>, is incorrect.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, in the columns of the Independent, in
reply to their notice of her work, the following statement
was made by the author:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The case stands thus: I am aiming to present, in a short and
popular form, in my next volume, the <emph>evidence</emph> that, in the Bible, we
have <emph>reliable</emph> and <emph>authoritative</emph> revelations from the Creator, and to
educe from these documents the true answer, not only to the question,
<q>What must <emph>we do</emph> to be saved?</q> but to the grand question
of my own profession, <q>What must we do the most effectively to
train the young mind to virtue and immortality?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>At my first step I am met by <q>Young America,</q> with such an
honest, amiable, and powerful leader as Theodore Parker. Regarded
as holding the creed in which I was educated, and most of
my life have advocated, I am thus interrogated:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q rend='pre'>Is not the Creator the author of the constitution of mind?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q rend='pre'>If the Creator <emph>had power</emph> to make it right and yet has made
it wrong, is he not proved by <emph>his works</emph> (the only mode of learning
his character) to be unwise and malevolent, and is not a <emph>reliable</emph>
revelation from such a being, to teach the way of virtue and
happiness, impossible?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q rend='pre'>Do you not claim that the Bible teaches that God <emph>has proved</emph>
his power to make mind perfect by creating angels and Adam
with <emph>perfect minds</emph>, and at the same time, as a penalty for the sin
of the first parent, has made such a constitution of things, that
every human mind comes into existence with a ruined and depraved
nature, that never <emph>can</emph>, or never <emph>will</emph>, act right till God re-creates
it, while as yet, for the great mass of mankind, he never
remedies this wrong?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q rend='pre'>Do you not claim that the Bible teaches that no human being
has any right and acceptable feelings or actions till God thus re-creates
the mind?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'><q>If the Bible <emph>does</emph> teach thus, we can find a nobler Creator and
more perfect system of religion by the light of nature without any
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
revelation at all, while the God of the Bible, by its own showing,
is <emph>proved</emph> unworthy of confidence as a teacher of the way to virtue
and happiness.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Pressed by these questions, I have searched the Bible in vain
to find any such doctrines in its pages. I find nothing of the kind,
and so I acknowledge that I have been in the wrong, and relinquish
the Augustinian dogma in which I have been educated, as unsupported
either by reason or revelation; and first privately and then
publicly ask for <emph>any evidence</emph> to sustain it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I come before the public, not as a teacher of metaphysics or
theology, but as an <emph>inquirer</emph> for the truth. I state, as nearly as I
am able, the difficulties I have met, and take every possible
method to avoid mistake and misrepresentation in regard to the
opinions of both those with whom I agree and those from whom
I differ.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I assume that theology is capable of improvement; that Protestant
divines are no more infallible than Catholic; that a humble and
teachable spirit is the distinctive mark of a Christian teacher; and
that the courage and manliness that can acknowledge mistakes is
not only more Christian, but even in the eye of the world, is more
honorable and dignified than any assumption of infallibility, however
well sustained.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In publicly meeting such an amount of talent, learning, and
influence as seems now to be arrayed against me, I deem that it
in no way implies a presumptuous or self-confident spirit. I concede
that many of those I thus meet are my equals or superiors in
natural abilities, and certainly all are so in learning. I believe also
they are men of conscientious integrity, and that, probably, most
of them, would go to the stake rather than knowingly to sacrifice
their allegiance to truth, duty, and God. And I believe that if I
have any special mission in this matter, it is to illustrate the truth
that <emph>common sense</emph>, without any unusual talents or learning, united
to a sincere desire to learn and to obey the truth, are sufficient for
all men and all women, in all important decisions for this life, and
as much so for the life to come.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Nor do I regard this as a resort to old and <emph>unpractical</emph> meta-physical
abstrusities. It rather involves that great <emph>practical</emph> question
of life, before which all others fade into nothingness&mdash;that
question which meets every parent and every teacher for every
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
child&mdash;which meets every human being, as in sorrow, or disappointment,
or sickness, or death, the soul asks from its Creator
help and guidance for the dread and eternal future. Instead of
leading to metaphysical and theological abstrusities, my hope is to
entice from their dark and sorrowful mazes to the plain and cheerful
path of common sense.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The great question involved is, have <emph>the people</emph> a reliable revelation
from the Creator in the Bible, and are they qualified to decide
what are its true teachings on that great question of life,
<q>What must we do to be saved?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>And at the same time, the great practical question for my sex
is no less at issue, <q>How are we best to train the mind of childhood
to virtue and eternal happiness?</q> These questions surely
are capable of being, and should be, discussed in the language of
the common people, and not in those scholastic and metaphysical
terms which they can not, and will not seek to comprehend.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In these circumstances I endeavor first to meet the charge of
my friends of the Independent, that I have misrepresented the
views of that class of theologians with whom they fraternize, and
with whom I claim to agree.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I offer the following as the exact words in which I have
heard the New Haven divines express their opinions, and which,
on my application, were sent to me as a correct statement of their
views, as taught for more than a quarter of a century, in the New
Haven School of Theology.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They maintain that <q>man, <emph>after</emph> the fall of Adam, was as truly
created in God's image as was Adam; that Christ was tempted in
all points like as we are; that the stronger are our inferior propensities,
if we govern them, as we can, by the morally right act of
the will, the greater is the moral excellence of the act. They do
not maintain that man has full power to <emph>change</emph> his depraved nature
without divine aid, for they have never supposed he has a
depraved nature <emph>in any sense</emph>, or a corrupt nature, much less a sinful
nature, to be changed; but rather that <emph>in nature</emph> he is like God.
In discussions, they have always opposed the use of language by
my father and Mr. Barnes of a corrupt nature, not sinful.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I present this as an exact statement of my own views, and I
claim that, on the point of the native character of the human
mind, it is the <emph>Pelagian</emph> ground in opposition to the <emph>Augustinian</emph>,
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
and that no <emph>third</emph> ground is possible. If I am wrong in either
particular, I ask to be enlightened by the editors of the Independent,
and by the New Haven divines themselves. I claim also
that, so far as I can see, this is the <emph>only</emph> ground on which the argument
above stated, as that of <q>Young America,</q> can be successfully
met.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I understand the editors of the Independent that they occupy
the Augustinian ground, and I therefore appeal to them, as well
as to the theologians of Princeton, Andover, Union, and Lane, to
instruct me and the public <emph>wherein</emph> I have misstated their views,
and above all, to instruct us how, with this dogma fastened to it,
the Bible can be sustained against the above infidel argument. In
reference to this, should any thing be attempted, I offer these
questions for attention:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Is there any passage in the Bible that teaches that the minds
of the angels or of Adam were not made exactly like those of
the descendants of Adam, and subjected to the same slow and
gradual process of acquisition and development?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I have looked and inquired in vain to find any such passage,
or to find any person who ever found one.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Is there any passage in the Bible that teaches that the <emph>nature</emph>
or constitution of the mind of man is not <emph>the best that is possible in
the nature of things</emph>? I have never been able to find any.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Is there any passage in the Bible that teaches that man has
received a <emph>ruined nature in consequence of Adam's sin</emph>?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have read long arguments from Dr. Hodge of Princeton,
proving that there is no such thing taught in Romans v., the only
passage ever claimed to teach this doctrine that I ever heard of.
My brother, Dr. E. Beecher, thus concludes a long argument on
this subject in the Conflict of Ages: <q>The doctrine that our depraved
natures or our sinful conduct have been <emph>caused</emph> or <emph>occasioned</emph>
by the sin of Adam, is not asserted in any part of God's
word.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The high, moral and intellectual character of the gentlemen
to whom this appeal was thus made, forbids the
idea that they would allow such statements and arguments
and appeals to go unnoticed if they felt able to
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
afford any light in reply to these questions. It was
their highest duty as teachers of theology, if they could
do it, to show how to answer the argument of <q>Young
America</q> against the Bible as containing the Augustinian
dogma; to show that the passage introduced
above as a specimen of the Pelagianism taught by the
New Haven divines either <emph>is not</emph> the doctrine they
teach or is not Pelagianism; to show that there <emph>are</emph>
some passages in the Bible that teach that the nature or
the constitution of man is not the best possible in the
nature of things, and <emph>is</emph> different from that of the unsinning
angels or unfallen Adam; and finally, to show
that there <emph>is</emph> some passage in the Bible that teaches
that the depraved nature of man was caused or occasioned
by the sin of Adam.
</p>

<p>
Not only the professors and editors thus addressed,
but all the theologians of all schools, so far as the
writer can learn, have maintained a profound <emph>silence</emph>
on all these questions. The <hi rend='italic'>Independent</hi> also declined
any <emph>discussion</emph> thus: <q>We have no intention of surrendering
our columns to a <emph>theological</emph> or <emph>psychological
controversy</emph> such as might be introduced by the communication
we now publish.</q>
</p>

<p>
The writer after this, in several cases, suggested to
some of the most active and intelligent minds in some
of the above theological seminaries, to endeavor to secure
a full discussion of these topics in their lecture
rooms, and was told, in reply, that all such efforts were
decidedly discouraged.
</p>

<p>
She also addressed notes to several editors of the
secular press to see if their columns could be used for
the purpose. From the one whose past freedom led
to the expectation of an affirmative answer, the reply
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
was, that he had promised his orthodox friends that he
would not <emph>needlessly</emph> introduce <emph>heresy</emph> into his paper,
and that the greatest of all heresies was <emph>common sense</emph>!
</p>

<p>
Finally, on consulting one of the most shrewd and
best informed publishers in regard to the future volume,
he expressed the opinion that <q>in whatever else
theologians differed, they were all united in the determination
that the investigation proposed by the author
<emph>should not be permitted</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
This being so, the author has concluded, and the
public probably will conclude, that the most profound
and acute theologians of this country have relinquished
the idea of attempting any farther defense of the Augustinian
dogma.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLVI. Present Position of the Church.</head>

<p>
The word <q>church,</q> as used in this article, refers
chiefly to those close corporations which claim to be
regenerated persons, whose depraved nature, transmitted
from Adam, has been so far rectified by re-creation,
that they are, more or less, in the practice of true virtue,
of which the unregenerate world are supposed to
be totally destitute.
</p>

<p>
In this sense they claim to be <q>the saints,</q> <q>the
righteous,</q> <q>the elect,</q> <q>the children of God,</q> <q>the
salt of the earth,</q> <q>the light of the world,</q> <q>a holy
nation,</q> <q>a peculiar people.</q>
</p>

<p>
While the members of these churches do not claim
that all who do not come into their organizations are
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
of the opposite class, they do, by their profession and
admission to such churches, claim to be of the regenerated
class, to whom the above terms of the Bible are
to be applied, while the great majority of mankind,
not in these organizations, are called by them <q>the
world,</q> <q>the unregenerate,</q> <q>sinners,</q> <q>the wicked,</q>
and by other similar terms.
</p>

<p>
So long as the great body of the people were guided
chiefly by ecclesiastics, and were thus trained to believe
that heaven was to be gained by some unintelligible
<q>change of nature,</q> imparted by priestly agency, or
by some supernatural intervention of God's Spirit,
these claims were regarded with mystified fear and
doubt.
</p>

<p>
But the more intelligence and discussion have spread
among the people, the more such claims have been
questioned and distrusted.
</p>

<p>
Many things have combined to increase such distrust.
Among these may be mentioned the discussions
already noticed, conducted by theologians themselves,
by which the absurdities and inconsistencies
maintained by each, were exposed by all the others.
</p>

<p>
Another cause of distrust has been the great variety
of <emph>tests</emph> and <emph>signs of regeneration</emph>. One class of religious
teachers claim a certain kind of experience as indispensable
to admission to the church. A second
class reprobate this sign and set up another. A third
class depreciate both and insist upon still another.
And thus it is made apparent, that theologians do not
agree among themselves what the <q>depraved nature</q>
of man consists in, nor what are the true signs or evidence
of its <q>saving change.</q>
</p>

<p>
Another cause of distrust has arisen from attempts
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
to carry out a system of church discipline. Some
churches expel persons for interpreting the Bible in a
different mode from themselves or their creed. Others
expel their members for vending alcoholic drinks, or
for dancing, or for holding slaves, or for marrying the
sister of a deceased wife. Meantime, the sins of pride,
anger, covetousness, avarice, worldliness, evil temper,
unfairness in business, hard dealings with the poor,
and many other developments of selfishness, often are
made no bar to full and honorable communion.
</p>

<p>
Again, in churches and sects that are most strenuous
in attempting to maintain by church discipline a
uniformity of interpretation of the Bible conformed to
their own, it has come to pass that orthodoxy of interpretation
is sometimes <emph>practically</emph> placed before morality
of conduct. Thus, if a member of a church or
a minister is suspected of denying the supreme divinity
of Christ, or the depravity and need of regeneration
of <emph>nature</emph> in man, a great agitation is produced,
and attempts are made, by church discipline, to rectify
the evil as very dangerous. In the meantime, a slanderous
tongue, or dishonest dealings, or selfish worldliness,
excite less concern, and arouse to less effort.
The inevitable result is an impression that churches
and ministers place conformity of interpretation to
their own creeds or opinions before morality, and
consequently the feeling is engendered, <emph>that church organizations,
founded on the Augustinian theory, tend to
immorality</emph>.
</p>

<p>
This impression as to the immoral tendency of such
church organizations, has been increased by the fact
that in times of special religious excitement, that class
of men in many cases, become most prominent as leaders
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
in prayer meetings and other public ministries
whose character for consistency in private life, or in
business matters, is low. It is perceived that this fact
does not prevent these men from being regarded as
religious men, and as superior to others, who, living
exemplary lives, are unable or unwilling to take any
conspicuous place in religious movements. And when
the period of excitement is passed, it is found that
these leaders in revival seasons are no better in their
private life and business dealings than before.
</p>

<p>
It is also sometimes the case that men of high character
and position, can not be reached by church discipline
as are the humbler members, and thus sin is
made respectable by its association at once with talents,
influence, wealth and church membership.
</p>

<p>
In addition to this, the fact that so many ministers
and churches have taken such an antagonistic course
in the public movements to remove intemperance and
slavery from our land, has led to open attacks on ministers
and churches in the newspapers, in public lectures
and in many other ways, in which their inconsistencies
have been held up to public ridicule as well
as to more serious denunciation.
</p>

<p>
So long as the <q>change of nature,</q> which fits man
for heaven, was regarded as a supernatural mystery
which no one could understand or explain, while the
approved signs of regeneration were submitted only
to ministers, deacons, elders and church committees,
the matter was exclusively in their keeping.
</p>

<p>
But as soon as the nature of regeneration began to
be explained intelligibly, and men adopted the common-sense
view, that the <emph>true</emph> church consists of persons
who not only believe in Christ intellectually, but
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
believe <emph>practically</emph>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that they are those who <emph>obey</emph>
Christ, the case bore a different aspect. <q>These are
the persons,</q> they say, <q>who organize on the assumption
that they are regenerated because they obey
Christ's teachings, while so many virtuous persons
are shut out as <emph>totally</emph> and <emph>entirely</emph> disobedient,&mdash;as
never feeling or acting truly virtuously in the sight
of God in a single instance!</q>
</p>

<p>
The more this questionable assumption has become
apparent, the more has been the disturbing influence
on both the church and the world.
</p>

<p>
Multitudes of serious, virtuous and conscientious
persons, who are really living Christian lives and
making it their chief concern to obey the great Master,
have refused to join associations that make such
dubious claims.
</p>

<p>
Still more has been the revulsion from those
churches which demand as terms to admission professed
belief in certain modes of interpreting the
Bible contained in a creed. They, holding the Protestant
doctrine that every man is to interpret the Bible
for himself, responsible to no man or body of men,
can not thus resign their religious liberty.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, the Christian profession has ceased to be
a cross in any way, and has rather become honorable.
Those who have been taught that a <emph>purpose</emph> or determination
to obey Christ was regeneration, have in many
cases formed such a purpose, confessed belief in the
needful creeds and joined the church in great numbers,
before they had time to ascertain whether they
had moral strength to carry out this purpose. They
find on trial that they have not, and then discover
that though there is an open door to <emph>enter</emph> the church
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
there is none for exit that is not discreditable, and so
they remain.
</p>

<p>
Others come into the church for worse motives, to
secure the confidence, respect and trust that is accorded
to that profession. Thus it has come to pass that
the class, denominated <q>the world,</q> has been growing
in Christian character and practical virtue, while, as a
body, <q>the church</q> has been deteriorating.
</p>

<p>
The writer, in her very extensive travels and intercourse
with the religious world, has had unusual opportunities
to notice how surely and how extensively
the conviction of this fact has been pressed on the
minds of the best class of Christian ministers and laymen.
More than twenty years ago, one of the most
laborious Episcopal bishops of the western States, in
reply to inquiries as to the state of religion in his
large diocese replied, <q>the world is growing better and
the church is growing worse.</q>
</p>

<p>
More than ten years ago, a distinguished lawyer, who
had extensive financial business to transact, himself
an honored and exemplary member of the church,
stated to the writer that he was decided in the conviction
that the better class of worldly men were more
honorable and reliable in business matters than the
majority of church members. When asked to account
for this, the reply was that religious men were
chiefly interested to get to heaven, which in their view
was to be secured <q>by faith and not by works,</q> and
so good works became a secondary concern. But the
chief concern of worldly men is to succeed in this life,
and they have learned that honesty is the best policy
in attaining their chief end.
</p>

<p>
This statement was repeated to another exemplary
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
church member, who, as a bank officer and lawyer
of distinguished integrity, was said to transact more
business than any other man in the north-western
States. He remarked that the above was exactly his
own opinion, and, moreover, he stated that a friend of
his, also a church member, who, he said, did more
business than any other man in Central New York,
had expressed to him the same opinion.
</p>

<p>
These statements were repeated not long ago to a
business man, an exemplary member of an orthodox
church in Boston, and he expressed the same opinion.
In repeated other instances that need not be enumerated,
in various sections of the country, the same opinion
has been expressed by intelligent and consistent
members of the church, whose prejudices would naturally
lead them to the most favorable view of the
case.
</p>

<p>
Such impressions have not been decreased by the
recent multiplied defalcations, forgeries, and other
business dishonesties that have occurred in the last
three years among church members and officers of religious
charities in high places of trust.
</p>

<p>
To all this add the fact, that a large class of men of
exemplary private life, who are spending their time,
money and influence for the relief of human woes and
the redress of social and political wrongs, are at the
same time openly attacking the church as the chief
bulwark of these wrongs, while all the delinquencies
of ministers and churches are freely discussed and denounced
by them <emph>before the people</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The result is, that a large portion of the most exemplary
and intelligent part of the church feel themselves
to be in a dubious and false position, and are
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
daily querying whether <emph>professing</emph> to be a <emph>peculiar</emph> people
is not doing more harm than good; and whether it
would not be better that the influence of good men
should rest on their <emph>unassociated</emph> individual character,
and not on organizations making such high profession
where the light of goodness is obscured by associated
darkness.
</p>

<p>
Great doubt and skepticism, both in the church and
out of it, have thus arisen also as to <emph>what real religion
consists in</emph>, and as to what <emph>are</emph> the true claims of the
church and its ministry.
</p>

<p>
Multitudes who would enter the church if it was
regarded simply as an association of persons to support
the ordinances appointed by Jesus Christ, and to
aid each other in obeying his Word, turn from its
present position and claims with distrust or disgust.
At the same time ministers and church members, feeling
these difficulties, have more and more relinquished
the Augustinian theory as the basis of their organization,
and are advancing to an open avowal of the common-sense
ground, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that the real invisible church
of Christ embraces all those who acknowledge him as
their Lord and Master, and make it their chief aim to
understand and to obey his teachings, and that a <emph>visible
church</emph> is any association of persons who organize
to aid each other in this object, by sustaining a ministry
and worship as <emph>they</emph> understand to be most in
agreement with the teachings of Christ.
</p>

<p>
The Episcopal church, both in Great Britain and in
this country, although as strictly Augustinian in its
articles as any other, has taken the lead of all others
in practically renouncing that system. Any man can
more readily secure all the privileges of membership
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
in that church without any confession of faith or public
profession of a <q>change of nature,</q> than in any of
the other Augustinian denominations, and this is probably
one great reason of its prosperity in this country.
</p>

<p>
Any sensible man of good moral character, who
should state in a respectful and candid spirit, that he
could not conscientiously submit to acknowledging
in any form, the rights of any man or body of men
to decide for him in regard to the interpretation of
the Bible; that according to his understanding of
its teachings, he was bound to acknowledge Jesus
Christ as his Lord and Master in all matters of faith
and practice, and to associate himself with other
avowed followers of Christ by some form of open acknowledgment;
that as he understands the New Testament,
the rites of baptism and the Lord's Supper
were instituted as forms of such acknowledgment
and communion, and that he wished thus to connect
himself with the Episcopal church without any creed,
confession or acknowledgment; it is believed, that in
such a case, there are few ministers and still fewer laymen
who would not think it right to gratify such a
desire. It is believed that there are many, also, of the
highest standing for intellect, piety and position in the
Presbyterian, Baptist, Methodist and Congregational
churches, who have so far thrown aside the system of
Augustine, that they also would receive such a man
to their communion on these terms.
</p>

<p>
In this state of feeling among laymen the developments
of sectarianism, which, as has been shown, all
relate to matters of rites and forms, resulting from
the Augustinian theory, have become more and more
suspicious and offensive. Especially is this the case
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
in the newer States, where union and harmony among
good men are most needed.
</p>

<p>
In the volume, of <hi rend='italic'>Common Sense Applied to Religion</hi>,
page 342, statistics are introduced from the reports
of three of the largest sects of this country, the Old
and New school Presbyterian and the Congregational
churches, showing that, owing to their sectarian divisions,
<emph>nearly one third</emph> of their churches are without
ministers, and <emph>nearly one half</emph> of these churches have
not over fifty members, the majority of these being
women, while the <emph>relative</emph> amount of ministers to
churches is constantly decreasing. Not only in the
large, but the smaller towns, the struggle to build
churches and support ministers among the various
sects, that differ only as to rites and forms, is most
mournful, making a taxation both on the East and
West for their support which is incredible.
</p>

<p>
Each denomination is trained to regard itself as
<q>the church of God</q> and to labor for its increase as
a service to God's cause, while the extension of other
sects is not so regarded. Although few intelligent
Protestants now believe that any forms or rites are indispensable
to salvation, each sect regards its own peculiarity
as of very great importance. And as all the
large sects are divided only on modes of baptism or
of church organization there is a constant tendency to
magnify these points of difference. Were it not for
this, in small places and in new settlements, all would
unite in one large, harmonious church, that could not
only support its own ordinances, but send of its surplus
to supply the destitute. Instead of this, the
feuds, envies, jealousies and bickerings between small
and struggling churches, of from four to twenty diverse
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
sects, are an occasion of reproach and contempt
to the world, and of mortification to all honorable and
pious minds.
</p>

<p>
So in regard to education, each sect is now acting
<emph>as a sect</emph>, in starting new colleges and seminaries, or in
endowing those already started, and this often with
little reference to the supply provided by other sects.
For example, in Ohio there are <emph>twenty-six</emph> endowed
colleges, in Indiana there are <emph>eleven</emph>, and thus at the
same rate in other new States.
</p>

<p>
Besides endowments to support professors, vast
sums have been spent in buildings, many of them
unused for want of pupils. After each sect has thus
gained its colleges, it must struggle to find pupils, and
thus multitudes of young boys are pressed into a
Latin and Greek course, not at all demanded in their
future pursuits, and often forsaken before the college is
ever reached. The waste of educational benefactions
in these ways is enormous.
</p>

<p>
These expenditures are all to be met by the laity,
and the more the nature of these sectarian divisions
is understood, the more distrustful are the people in
regard to these profuse expenditures to keep up such
divisions. Multitudes of intelligent laymen contribute
simply because their clergymen urge it, and entirely
without intelligent approval of these things.
To their own view, Christianity, as exhibited by contending
sects, is a source of more evil feeling, contention
and needless expense than of compensating benefits,
and distrust and misgiving increase and abound.
</p>

<p>
In such a position of the organized church, one of
the most remarkable indications to be noted is the occurrence
of a <q>revival</q> among all sects, in which <emph>the
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
people</emph> take the lead, and theologians and pastors willingly
resign their wonted place. All badges of sect
are dropped, and the dogmas of Augustine, from
which they originated, are thrown aside. The system
of common sense is recognized, and its intelligent and
harmonizing influence secures, for the first time, the
respectful attention of worldly men toward religious
developments, which in all past time have been regarded
by them with suspicion or scorn.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLVII. State of the Pastors of Churches.</head>

<p>
That portion of the clerical world who, as pastors,
are most nearly in connection with the people, are
necessarily affected with the influences that touch theologians,
and also with the condition of their people.
</p>

<p>
They find that what they have been trained to regard
as a <emph>fundamental</emph> doctrine of the Bible, has ceased
to be defended by those who have been their teachers
in theology, and who are the leaders of their sect.
</p>

<p>
They find their own minds very greatly in doubt
as to many points taught them in their theological
training. They find intelligent laymen refusing to enter
the church, whom they feel to be as really followers
of Christ in heart and life as any in their churches,
while they see many professors of religion as selfish,
worldly and unprincipled as most of the world around,
and yet they can not exclude them.
</p>

<p>
They find intelligent young men coming to them
expressing a desire to obey Christ and to unite with
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
his followers in efforts to <q>be good and to do good,</q>
but unable to subscribe to the creed of the church in
regard to a depraved nature and associated tenets,
while by one expedient or another these pastors waive
the difficulty and receive them into their churches.
They find intelligent mothers and Sunday-school
teachers throwing aside the Augustinian dogma, and
training their little ones to believe that they can love
and serve their Saviour with their present nature and
faculties, and that every attempt to conform to the
rules of duty is well-pleasing to God, and a step
forward in the path to heaven.
</p>

<p>
They find intelligent Christian mothers wishing to
bring their children to the communion with no other
profession than that they desire and intend to obey
their Saviour in all things.
</p>

<p>
In this state of things, some of the most successful
and intelligent pastors have decided, in such cases, to
cut loose from their creeds and confessions, and to receive
to the communion any young children whom
their parents believe and feel to be thus prepared
for it.
</p>

<p>
The position assumed by the parochial clergy in the
great revival of the past year, has been a remarkable
index.
</p>

<p>
<emph>The people</emph> of all sects and creeds came together to
express their wish and intention to serve the Lord
Christ by obedience to his word in heart and life,
and their pastors sat with them as equals in all respects
before the common Father. They related their
experience; they exhorted each other to persevere;
they united in prayers for help and guidance, and
their pastors ceased to urge attention to those <q>doctrines</q>
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
founded on the Augustinian theory, which in
former revivals were made so prominent.
</p>

<p>
There are incidents that have come under the personal
observation of the writer the past year in regard
to the parochial clergy which are very ominous on account
of the character of the persons involved, who
not only are among the first in intelligence and influence,
but may properly be denominated, in reference
to the leading class of pastors, <q>representative men.</q>
</p>

<p>
In one case, a young man of great intelligence and
moral worth, who might properly be regarded as a
<q>representative man</q> of the better portion of <q>Young
America,</q> informed the writer that he and his wife
had accepted the general invitation of their pastor to
receive the communion. Inasmuch as the doctrines
of the creed of that church were not accepted by him,
the inquiry was made whether this step was taken
with the approval of his pastor, and the reply was in
the affirmative.
</p>

<p>
The inquiry was then made, on what ground he
united in this ordinance. The reply was, substantially,
that he wished to be good and to do good,
guided by the teachings of Christ; that he wished to
be united in feeling and action with good men, who
cherish the same aims, and also to make it manifest
that he was associated with that class; that he regarded
this sacramental ordinance as instituted for
this very purpose, while his minister, as a consistent
Protestant, did not insist that he should interpret
the Bible according to his creed or be shut out
from this privilege.
</p>

<p>
In another case, an intelligent mother who had
trained her children exclusively on the common-sense
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
theory, informed the writer that she had taken
them to the Lord's Table with the consent of one of
the most distinguished pastors of the land, without
any examination or admission to the church. She
simply narrated to him her own opinion that her
children from early years had learned to love the
Saviour and to be conscientious in daily efforts to
obey his teachings; that they and she felt that they
were commanded by their Saviour openly to acknowledge
themselves as his followers, <q>even to the
death,</q> if need be, in order to fulfill all righteousness,
and that they did not and could not believe the
creed of that church, nor in the right of any man, or
body of men, to exact such belief under penalty of
exclusion from the table of their Lord.
</p>

<p>
The pastor welcomed these lambs of the fold with
their mother, and felt that had he driven them away
it would have been in defiance to their Saviour's word,
<q>Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not.</q>
</p>

<p>
In still another case, one of the most honored Congregational
pastors of New England openly declared
to friends of the writer that it was in vain to try to
preach this Augustinian system any longer; that <emph>the
people would not hear it</emph>, and that he should have to
preach to bare walls if he attempted it any more.
</p>

<p>
Many other similar incidents that have come to the
knowledge of the writer in different quarters of the
country, might be added, but the above will suffice as
illustrative indications of the present position of pastors.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLVIII. The Position of Popular Education.</head>

<p>
It is a significant fact in regard to the religious
training of the young in this country, that the most
influential leaders of popular education, especially in
its earlier stages of improvement, have been laymen,
and laymen who reject the Augustinian dogma, and
all organizations founded on it. And yet they are
men who believe in, and have exhibited by their example,
the great duty of love to God and love to
man, in a life of obedience to the physical, social and
moral laws of God.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, the laws of the land which forbid any
exclusive favor to any religious sect, do, in fact, forbid
any religious training in common schools that
conflicts with the common-sense system. It has been
shown (chapter 39) that the larger Christian sects are
all founded, in their distinctive features, on the Augustinian
dogma. This being so, the law that excludes
distinctive sectarian teaching excludes the Augustinian
system.
</p>

<p>
In regard to smaller sects, not Augustinian, the distinctive
doctrine of the Unitarian creed is such a <emph>unity</emph>
in regard to the Creator as forbids the idea of more
than one divine person who has all the attributes of
God. This, it has been shown in chapter 18, is contrary
to the common-sense system.
</p>

<p>
The distinctive doctrine of the Universalist creed
forbids the idea of the perpetuated existence of sinful
and miserable beings; this, also, is contrary to the
common-sense system, as shown in chapter 28. Thus
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
the chief sects that are not counted as Augustinian or
Evangelical, are also excluded from introducing their
distinctive tenets into the common schools of the people.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, while the people, in the schools under
their control, thus forbid by law any religious training
which conflicts with the common-sense system,
they permit prayers to God and the use of the Bible,
<emph>provided</emph> the privilege is not used, in opposition to
the spirit of the above law, to introduce distinctive
sectarian tenets.
</p>

<p>
It is also very noticable that in Great Britain the
most influential patrons of popular education, and writers
on the training of the young, have, though members
of the established church, vigorously opposed the Augustinian
system. Archbishop Whateley has written
a most powerful argument, and one which none have
attempted to answer, in favor of the common-sense
view of church organization. He also has given all
his influence to the establishment of schools for the
people, in which every parent and child shall, as far
as possible, be <emph>free</emph> in regard to religious matters.
</p>

<p>
The beloved and honored name of Arnold, dear to
every liberal educator of every sect and name, has set
the example of a religious training that is based entirely
on the common-sense system. And probably
there is not a man living or dead whose influence has
been so extensive in guiding public opinion on this
subject. Without openly denying the articles, or forsaking
the established church, Whateley, Arnold and
their associates have warred on the Augustinian theory
and its offsets more energetically and effectively
than any two men that can be named.
</p>

<p>
Thus, it appears, that the people themselves, and
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
the chief leaders in popular education, have decided
that no teaching that conflicts with the system of
common-sense shall be introduced into the common
schools.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter XLIX. The Position of Woman as Chief Educator
of Mind.</head>

<p>
One of the most important indices of religious
change is the advance in the character of female education
during the last thirty years.
</p>

<p>
Fifty years ago, to read, write and cipher, and a
few accomplishments, were all that were attempted in
the school education of women. A little history and
one or two other branches were added in some of the
higher schools.
</p>

<p>
It being assumed that the <emph>equal</emph> culture of <emph>all</emph> the
faculties, so as to insure a <emph>well-balanced</emph> mind, is the
chief aim of all education, it is probable that the mental
culture of women in this country for the last thirty
years has approached nearer to the true standard than
was ever known in the experience of any other nation.
</p>

<p>
The training to the handicraft of the needle, even
if only for ornament, the measure of domestic duty
that most young girls learn to perform, the culture of
the musical taste and the art of drawing, the combination
in female schools of mathematics, languages
and general knowledge, and the immense variety of
culture from lectures and general reading, all have
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
tended to develop the female mind on a scale of advancement
and equable culture never before known.
</p>

<p>
The result is a generation of women well trained
for high and independent thought and action. At the
same time, it is probable that there never before was
so large a proportion of the best educated women who
were so decidedly conscientious and religious.
</p>

<p>
It is granted by all, that it is to woman more than
to man, that is committed the chief business of training
the human mind at its most important stage of development.
It is granted, also, that in order to success
in culture, both physical and mental, it is the first
step to understand <emph>the nature</emph> of that which is to be
trained and developed. The first question, then, to
every woman, in reference to her first duty is, what
is <emph>the nature</emph> of the minds given us to train?
</p>

<p>
In this light, it is as if a gardener were to receive
some rare and delicate plant with directions
from his lord to train it with the utmost care; his first
inquiry would be, What is its nature? Does it require
sun or shade? Does it need a moist or a sandy soil?
Is it a climber, or a shrub, or a tree? Or, it is as if a
young machinist should receive from his master a collection
of wheels and springs, and a great variety of
delicate machinery, with the direction to put them together
and adjust them for right action. His first inquiry
would be, what is the <emph>nature</emph> of the thing to be
thus arranged? For what <emph>end</emph> or <emph>purpose</emph> is it constructed?
What is the <emph>mode of working it</emph> which will
best accomplish the end designed?
</p>

<p>
In like manner woman receives from her Lord the
delicate physical form and immortal spirit of her child
to train <emph>aright</emph> for an existence never to end. She
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
asks of those who are her Lord's messengers for this
very end, what is <emph>the nature</emph> of this wonderful and delicate
organization? What is the <emph>end</emph> or <emph>purpose</emph> for
which it is made? What is the <emph>mode</emph> of <emph>training</emph>
which will best accomplish the end designed?
</p>

<p>
The preceding pages exhibit the kind of replies that
for ages have met these heart-wrenching queries of
womanhood. From most, it is shown, she hears that
the <emph>ruined nature</emph> of her offspring is such that she can
do absolutely nothing to secure any right development.
Others tell her that no one knows what was
the end or purpose for which the mind of her child
was made. Others tell her that no one knows what
are <emph>right</emph> means in regard to the training and action
of mind. Others tell her that the mind of her child is
constructed wrong, and that nothing can be done to
secure its right training and development, but in some
way to induce its Maker to re-create it.
</p>

<p>
Meantime, also, her teachers are in conflict as to
what is the difficulty with the <emph>nature</emph> of her child, and
what would be its right action, and what is to be done
to secure its right development. At the same time,
the greater portion of the teachings on this great matter
are so enveloped in abstruse theological and metaphysical
technics as to baffle the wisest in their attempts
to gain clear and definite ideas from them.
</p>

<p>
In this state of the case many sensible mothers and
teachers, all over the land, have adopted a course dictated
by their own common sense and their experience
of the <emph>nature</emph> of mind, as discovered in their attempts to
train it. In pursuing such a course, many of them have
taught simply the system of common sense, leaving
out entirely the Augustinian contradictions. They
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
have in various forms of language taught their little
ones after this fashion: <q>Your heavenly Father made
you to be happy and to make others happy. In order
to this, he wishes that you should always have what
you like best, except when it would injure you or others.
But when what you like best and want the most,
is not <emph>best</emph> for you or <emph>best</emph> for others, you must always
choose what is <emph>for the best</emph>, and in so doing you act virtuously
and please and obey God. And just so far as
you do all that is best for yourself and for others, guided
by the teachings of Christ, and with the desire and
purpose to obey him, you become a virtuous, pious
and holy child, and a true Christian.</q>
</p>

<p>
In taking such a course as this, many mothers and
teachers find themselves in antagonism with the teachings
of the pulpit, the Sunday School and the great
body of religious books, and yet they persevere.
And sometimes they take their children from the
Sunday School because the home training is there so
directly assailed. And they would, in some cases,
keep them from the church also, were not the theological
technics so effective in protecting childhood
from all comprehension of a large portion of pulpit
teachings.
</p>

<p>
It is such intelligent, cultivated and pious mothers
and teachers that go to their pastors with their perplexities
and troubles, and not unfrequently find that
tender sympathy which those only can give who have
suffered the same kind of distress.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter L. Present Position of Young America.</head>

<p>
By the term <q>Young America,</q> as it is used at this
day, seems to be intended that class of youthful minds
who are striving to free themselves from all past ecclesiastical
and conventional restraints, and who are
aiming to think and act with entire freedom on all
subjects.
</p>

<p>
The most active and efficient of this class are those
who by general reading and study have both strengthened
their reasoning powers and been most affected
by the causes before described, which have tended
to lessen respect for the church founded on the Augustinian
theory of such a depraved nature transmitted
from Adam, that all unregenerate doings are <q>sin,
and only sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
These young minds find the power of the pulpit,
the church, the religious press, and the religious training
of the family, the school and the college all combined
to enforce this doctrine. They feel galled and
indignant at the chains which they find around them;
and trained to interpret the Bible as teaching this doctrine
and the system based on it, they secretly revolt
from the authority of that book. They feel that the
ministers and churches which sustain this doctrine
are the grand impediments to freedom of thought
and opinion, and the chief fortress of a system which
to them is hateful in theory, and, in their view, destructive
alike to a true manhood and a pure morality.
</p>

<p>
But if they speak out their feelings they will be denounced
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
as infidels and avoided as dangerous persons.
What is more trying still, the mother they love so
much will be distressed, their father will be equally
grieved and perhaps offended with their self-conceit,
and all their Christian friends will be disturbed and
displeased.
</p>

<p>
Under these conflicting influences there exists a
constant conflict between their honest convictions and
desire for truth and independent action, and their gentle
and generous impulses. This is the condition of
multitudes of young minds, who to please a mother,
a father, a sister or a friend, attend church and listen in
silence to much that they do not believe and to some
things which they abhor. Others quietly withdraw
from all religious ministries, on the plea that Sunday
is more profitably spent by them in quiet strolls or
reading at home, while the real trouble, secretly burning
in their hearts, is scarcely breathed aloud.
</p>

<p>
Of this class of minds not a few are found in our
theological seminaries. And here they encounter new
difficulties. As the system of Augustinianism is developed
as the basis of their professional training,
they attempt to meet it with some discussion. In this
they find little or no encouragement. <emph>Free discussion</emph>
seems to be deemed inadmissible, and those who urge
it find themselves in an uncomfortable minority, who
are regarded rather as agitators than as manly and independent
seekers after truth.
</p>

<p>
But the most powerful influence on the most influential
class of <q>Young America,</q> as highest in intellectual
and moral development, has been the practical
working of <emph>two false principles</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The first of these is, that <emph>organizations</emph> to promote
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
truth and righteousness are of more consequence than
truth and righteousness. Thus, to a Catholic, the reputation
and interests of <emph>the church</emph>&mdash;that is, the clergy&mdash;are
to be regarded first, so that its pope and priesthood
are to be shielded from the public exposure of
whatever crimes they may commit, lest the influence
of the church should suffer. Thus, in Protestant ecclesiastical
organizations, the sins of their chief leaders
are sometimes covered and palliated, lest their church
and order be discredited. Thus the college faculty
are sometimes sustained by parents or the public in
unjust proceedings, lest the respect and confidence of
the pupils or the public toward them should be impaired.
Thus, also, the officers of benevolent associations
are tolerated and shielded from odium for
conduct that should receive universal disapprobation.
In such cases, the <emph>end</emph> is made secondary to the means&mdash;the
instrumentalities to promote virtue receive more
regard than virtue itself. This, among <q>fishers of
men,</q> is making taking the fish secondary to the care
of the net.
</p>

<p>
The other false principle is, that men are to be restrained
from protesting against wrong, in cases where
it would make great trouble and difficulty to individuals
or to communities involved in it.
</p>

<p>
That men are to use discretion and consult expediency
as to the <emph>time</emph> and <emph>manner</emph> of exposing and denouncing
wrong, is one of the teachings of common
sense. But that men are to protest against wrong
only when it makes little or no trouble to any one,
and be silent when contention and trouble would result
from such protesting, is a principle that would
have inhibited the spread of Christianity by the apostles,
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
of the Reformation by Luther, and of every other
great reform.
</p>

<p>
The extent to which wise and good men have adopted
and acted on these false principles has probably
done more to undermine faith in the Bible and the
church than all other causes united.
</p>

<p>
The tendency has been to generate the feeling that
the great organizations based on the Bible and aiming
to extend its authority, are really little better than
associations to sustain the power and the influence of
a certain privileged class, at the sacrifice of not only
truth and righteousness, but of manly freedom of
thought and speech.
</p>

<p>
The extent of real infidelity, not only in our colleges,
but among the young mechanics of our shops and manufactories,
the young farmers in our fields, the clerks in
our offices and stores, and Young America all over the
nation, is little imagined by those, who, on the field of
conservatism, are striving to repress free discussion.
There are seething and glowing fires gathering for
vent, which such attempts are as vain to restrain as are
bands of cobwebs to confine an outbursting volcano.
</p>

<p>
In speaking thus confidently of the present position
of woman and of <q>Young America,</q> it seems proper
to notice the opportunities that have been furnished
to attain some knowledge in this direction.
</p>

<p>
During twelve years of service as principal of institutions
at the East and West, in which nearly a thousand
young girls from the most influential classes and
from nearly every State in the Union have been under
her training, the writer gained no little insight into
the varied experiences of the young. Later in life, ill
health and other causes led to frequent reunions with
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
former pupils all over the land, who as mothers, wives
and sisters sought sympathy and counsel. Thus was
gained the private history and the personal acquaintance
of their husbands, brothers and sons, in many
professions and in various colleges.
</p>

<p>
In many cases the sons would disclose to a candid
and sympathizing friend mental experiences and histories
of themselves and their companions, which,
from motives of tenderness, were hidden even from
the most kind and judicious parents. The affiliated
societies that bring the most influential young men of
different colleges together, their meetings for anniversary
and club reunions, have generated a common
pulse, as it were, through the great body of the most
highly educated and most influential young men in
the land; so that learning what affects a small portion
teaches also what affects the whole.
</p>

<p>
These intimations indicate but a small portion of
the opportunities which have led to the opinions expressed
in this and the preceding chapter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LI. Present Position of the Religious Press.</head>

<p>
To any one who examines the religious press of the
different sects of the present time, it is clear that there
never was a period in which the <emph>ecclesiasticism</emph> founded
on the Augustinian theory was more a leading object
of effort. At the time that the Bible Society and other
benevolent religious associations originated, the tendency
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
of the different sects was to a harmonious union
for the great end of sending the gospel to the destitute.
At that time, questions in relation to the modes
of ordination and baptism, and as to church officers,
seemed to vanish as matters of small concern to all
whose chief aim was to save the lost. But now the
reverse tendency is manifest. Every sect is engaged
in magnifying the importance of its own distinctive
peculiarity, in getting up publishing houses to disseminate
its own peculiar modes of religious teaching, in
raising funds to build churches, and in building up its
own distinctive schools and colleges. And this is
done not so much, as it would seem, because the salvation
of ignorant and guilty men depends on these
sectarian peculiarities, as because the extent, respectability
and influence of a sect will be thus promoted.
Every editor of every religious paper, therefore,
is a chief leader in an effort to build up a sect, which
as before shown, originates from the Augustinian
dogma.
</p>

<p>
It is an established maxim in law and all administration
of justice, that where a man's property,
character, and professional success are involved, he is
barred from testimony as an incompetent witness.
And it is deemed no disparagement to the most honorable
and high-minded men in the community to be
dealt with on the assumption that such personal interests
so bias men's judgment that they can not be trusted.
</p>

<p>
Now it will not be denied by any one, that our religious
periodicals are all supported by the differing
sects with the express understanding that each shall
advocate the views of the sect that especially patronizes
it. And should any editor become convinced that
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
the opinions he was appointed to advocate are false, he
could not honorably retain his office without declaring
his change of opinion, and this declaration would inevitably
result in the loss of his professional character
and income among his friends and supporters.
</p>

<p>
For example, if the editor of the Independent were
to become convinced that churches organized on the
Congregational mode were unscriptural, and should
attempt to defend such a view, he would either resign
his post or be removed from it. The same would
be true in regard to the editors of the Presbyterian,
Episcopal, Baptist and Methodist religious magazines
and newspapers.
</p>

<p>
So in regard to the professors of our theological
schools, who are the chief supporters of theological
magazines. They must all teach the Augustinian
dogma of a depraved nature transmitted from Adam
to all his descendants, or resign their professional reputation,
their office and its income.
</p>

<p>
These being facts, it may properly be affirmed that
the religious press in this country is barred from the
full and free discussion of the great question of eternal
life, <q>What must we do to be saved?</q>
</p>

<p>
One of the most remarkable indications of this fact
is the course pursued by the leading religious periodicals
of each sect in noticing the work before referred
to, <hi rend='italic'>Common Sense applied to Religion, or the Bible and
the People</hi>. In that work, and in an article in the Independent,
as well as by private letters, an appeal was
made to their editors, who, many of them, are personal
friends of the writer, to instruct her and to instruct the
public wherein there was any failure in that work,
either in setting forth truly the principles of common
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
sense and the rules of interpretation, or in deducing
by these principles the <emph>system</emph> of common sense, or in
proving that the Augustinian dogma and the system
founded on it were contrary to the common sense and
the moral sense of mankind, and unsupported by the
Bible.
</p>

<p>
As these editors are not only honorable and Christian
gentlemen, but among the most acute and profound
metaphysicians in the world, it would be the
height of ill manners to assume that, discerning any
failures, they refused to specify them, either in private
or in public, except for the reasons intimated.
No editor whose periodical is supported by a sect for
the express purpose of maintaining its distinctive peculiarities,
could indorse that work as correct in its
statements and arguments without giving up the basis
on which the existence of that sect depends which supports
his periodical.
</p>

<p>
In these circumstances the editors of the Independent
fairly and openly avowed that they could not open
their columns to <q>a psychological and theological discussion</q>
of this sort. And every editor of every other
religious periodical tacitly made the same declaration
by <emph>entire silence</emph> on the main subject of the volume&mdash;the
very principles, involving the existence of the sect
for whose defense they were appointed.
</p>

<p>
So manifest was this position of these leaders of
the theological world, that the most intelligent and
best informed publishers came to the conclusion that
whatever else theologians differed about, they were
all united in the determination that such a discussion
of these points as was sought by the author
should not be permitted. And even the editors of the
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
secular press were urged not to allow their columns to
be used for such purposes.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LII. The Present Position of the Secular Press.</head>

<p>
The most decided index of the coming agency of
the people, in throwing off the Augustinian system, is
the present position of the secular press.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown how much the religious press is
restrained in liberty of opinion and expression, so
that it is probable that there is not a professedly religious
paper in the nation that could controvert the
<emph>distinctive</emph> doctrines of the sect that patronizes it without
losing its character and income.
</p>

<p>
But the secular press is far less encumbered with
such difficulties. The progress of this great power
toward the discussion of such subjects has been very
striking. At first there began to be seen simple reports
of the religious anniversaries in some secular
papers. This proving popular, next there came notices
of missionary and benevolent operations. Then
notices of the sermons of distinguished clergymen were
given, and then whole columns of daily papers were occupied
with sermons from ministers, without regard to
denomination. Finally, the great <q>revival</q> became a
topic of the secular press. Reports of religious meetings,
the number who were counted as converts, and
all the details connected with this great popular movement
were chronicled in the secular almost as fully
as in the religious press.
</p>

<p>
The comments of editors, also, on this subject, were
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
usually respectful, candid, and in many cases very
able and discriminating. The result has been, that
inasmuch as the religious press circulates chiefly
among <q>the church</q> and the secular press among
<q>the world,</q> the gospel has been preached to sinners
far more by secular than by religious editors. And
it may be assumed as a fact, that the secular editors
of this nation have far more power and influence in
guiding the religious opinions and moral conduct of
<q>the world</q> than either the clergy or the religious
press, and probably more than both combined.
</p>

<p>
In this state of the case, all the interests of the religious
press are opposed to free investigation and discussion,
and all the interests of the secular press are as
powerfully interested to promote it.
</p>

<p>
In appealing, therefore, from the theological world
to <q>the people,</q> it is the editors of the secular press&mdash;the
true <q><emph>Tribunes</emph> of the people</q>&mdash;who will render
the verdict, and this verdict is awaited with very
little doubt or apprehension in regard to its nature.
</p>

<p>
The questions submitted for decision are not so
comprehensive as those of the volume referred to in
which theologians chiefly were invoked, and which
they have as yet declined to answer. The questions
submitted to <emph>the people</emph> are briefly these: Does common
sense, or does the Bible teach that every human
being possesses such a depraved nature as never to
perform any truly virtuous act until this nature is re-created
by God? and are the churches organized on
the assumption that its members are diverse from the
world, in that they, as regenerated persons, perform
virtuous acts as no unregenerated person ever does,
sanctioned by common sense or by the Bible?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter LIII. What The People Will Do?</head>

<p>
It has been shown that the Augustinian dogma of
a depraved nature is the foundation of all the large
sectarian organizations in this country, and of the
contentions, evil passions and waste of property resulting
from such divisions among Christians.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that the leading theologians
have ceased to defend this dogma, that the pastors
of churches are practically evading it, that the educators
of the young are throwing it aside, and that the
people in all directions are rejecting it.
</p>

<p>
This process of eliminating the Augustinian system
from the system of common sense and the Bible,
with which, for ages, it has been entwined, thus far
has gone on as the result chiefly of the development
of the intellectual and moral nature of all classes, but
especially of the <emph>common people</emph>. A period has now
arrived in which the question has become so far an
intelligible and a <emph>practical</emph> one, that the two great
principles of society indicated by the words <emph>conservatism</emph>
and <emph>progress</emph> are arranging and accumulating antagonistic
forces for an open and decided manifestation
on this great question. What will be the precise
nature of this manifestation no human mind can predict.
But the distinctive principles of the two parties
furnish some data for anticipating some future results,
as they may occur in the several classes referred to
in preceding chapters under the following heads:
</p>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<div>
<head>What Theologians will do?</head>

<p>
In attempting to indicate the probable future course
of theologians, it is important to notice the relative
positions of persons trained to sustain a <emph>system</emph> of doctrines,
and of those who seek for truth and duty without
any such commitment.
</p>

<p>
Most theologians grow up from infancy under a
system of doctrines inculcated both from the pulpit
and in the family. This enlists all the strong and
inveterate influences of early education in its favor.
Next, the collegiate pulpit instructions and associations
all favor the same system. Next, the theological
school brings the young under the direct training
of the most acute minds, whose express business it is
to teach all methods of supporting and defending that
<emph>system</emph>. Here the young minister is taught how to
construct his sermons so as most effectually to bring
the popular mind under its control, and so as to most
effectively oppose all antagonistic sects and teachings.
</p>

<p>
Finally, the office of a clergyman involves such ecclesiastical
relations as subjects a man to constant espionage,
and to ecclesiastical discipline and ejection if
he adopts any views that would essentially modify the
<emph>system</emph> in which he is trained.
</p>

<p>
If, therefore, any theologian or pastor finds himself
doubting as to any doctrine, he perceives that it is so
interlocked with the <emph>system</emph> of which it is a part that
he is at once brought face to face with the question,
Shall I give up <emph>the whole system</emph> in which I was educated,
all the lectures and sermons framed on that system,
all my ecclesiastical connections, my professional
character and my salary?
</p>

<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>

<p>
It is as if a man should find himself in some emergency
upholding by a single timber a portion of a
building which so interlocks with every other portion
that he can not let it go without throwing down the
only house that can shelter himself and all he holds
dear. In such a case a man must come to a decision
as to whether the piece of timber <emph>ought</emph> to be removed,
and <emph>when</emph> and <emph>how</emph> it should be done, with an anxiety,
deliberation and forecast that would be inappropriate
to a man who finds only a disconnected stick of timber
in his way. This illustrates the relative position and
difficulties of theologians in contrast with those which
impede the common people in the search after truth
and duty.
</p>

<p>
In this view of the case it would be unreasonable
to expect that theologians <emph>as a class</emph>, though among
the wisest and best of men, are to be leaders in any
great or sudden change in religious opinions. On the
contrary, it is to be anticipated that they will be the
most earnest, energetic, and at the same time honest,
defenders of time-honored religious dogmas, which it
is their professional business to uphold. Nor is it any
implication of their talents, learning, honesty or piety
to suppose that they will be among the last to perceive
the fallacies and evils involved in whatever <emph>system</emph>
they defend.
</p>

<p>
Yet there are considerations which indicate that the
experience of the past is not to be the exact image of
the future. The progress of mind is as distinctly
marked among theologians as it is among any class
of society, and this being toward the system of common
sense, involves the waning of the dogmatic spirit
of infallibility and the increase of that humble and
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
teachable spirit, which is alike the mark of true philosophy
and of Christianity.
</p>

<p>
In the infantile development of our race mere physical
prowess was deemed the chief virtue and was the
grand aim of all manly culture.
</p>

<p>
In the next higher stage of development <emph>intellectual
power</emph> became the object of highest veneration and
assiduous cultivation.
</p>

<p>
The advent of a still higher stage of development
is now dawning, which is best illustrated by the docile
spirit of a little child, which feels exalted by taking
a low place, which understands that true dignity
and magnanimity consists, not in assumed infallibility,
but in a modest and humble acknowledgment of ignorance,
of mistakes, and of the need of knowledge and
guidance, not only from God but from men.
</p>

<p>
It is believed that it is not too much to expect that
this stage of high development is to be found even
among that class most unfavorably placed for the attainment
of it.
</p>

<p>
Should this be the case, there will soon be the <emph>conservative</emph>
and the <emph>progressive</emph> parties among theologians;
the one holding on to both of the contradictory systems,
and maintaining their infallibility; the other,
openly cutting loose from all that conflicts with their
common sense and moral sense, will manfully and
honestly confess their fallibility and past mistakes.
</p>

<p>
Between these two parties will be a third class, who
either from policy or from timidity, or from inability
to form decided opinions, will maintain entire silence
as to any thing involving entire commitment to either
party.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>

<div>
<head>What the Pastors will do?</head>

<p>
The pastors of the people are that class in which
the division of <emph>conservatism</emph> and <emph>progress</emph> must most
immediately and most distinctly appear. And the
reason is, that the question to them is a <emph>practical</emph> one,
more so than it can be to any other class of men.
</p>

<p>
It is their business and calling to teach men what
they must do to be saved, and every week they must
appear before the public to give their opinions on this
very question.
</p>

<p>
In this situation, the conservative class will include
all who have taken the opinions of their theological
teachers as an act of memory, with very little original
thought or investigation. These, being helpless
as to any ability to investigate or to reason independently,
will continue to preach and teach in the same
round as was given them in their course of theological
study. Such will be alarmed and distressed at
the changes in opinion all around them, and will
mourn over them as departures from the good old
paths of truth and safely. Such will be sustained
chiefly by the old and conservative portion of their
parishes, while the most active minds, both young and
old, will become more and more restless and dissatisfied,
or forsake entirely such ministrations.
</p>

<p>
In the progressive class of pastors, there will be a
marked division. The first will include those who
have clear and decided perceptions of truth and duty,
and at the same time a full conviction that outspoken
frankness and honesty is not only a duty, but the best
policy.
</p>

<p>
Thus, when they find their minds perplexed and
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
doubtful as to the system in which they have been
trained, they will, if called to speak, frankly say so.
If they advance to a new position, and yet are not
clear in regard to certain connected topics, they will
say so. If they are clear that the system of Augustine
is false, root and branch, they will say so, and carry
out all the results involved in this position. In short,
they will go forward in a perfect faith in truth, honesty
and freedom of speech.
</p>

<p>
Nor will they consult <q>expediency,</q> except as to
the <emph>time</emph> and the <emph>manner</emph> of making known their
change of opinion.
</p>

<p>
The other portion will adopt the policy which assumes
that peace and quiet in holding error is more
important than truth which involves trouble and contention.
Such will conceal their real opinions under
forms of expression that will deceive the conservative
portion of their people, by making the impression that
they hold to old creeds and formularies, in the sense
in which they formerly did, when they do not. They
will use the stereotyped forms of orthodoxy, knowing
that those of their people who are alarmed at supposed
changes, will be quieted by impressions which
are false. And they will do this, believing it to be
Christian expediency, although it is a course exactly
opposite to that pursued by Christ and his disciples.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What the Church will do?</head>

<p>
In regard to church organizations, it has been shown
that there are two diverse principles on which these
organizations may be perpetuated. The first is the
Augustinian, in which the principle of union is a
supposed change of the nature transmitted from Adam,
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
enabling a man to perform truly virtuous acts, as
none ever do who are not thus re-created. The second
is that of common sense, in which the principle
of union is the acknowledgment of Jesus Christ as
Lord and Master, and the purpose to obey him in all
things; or, in the words of the Episcopal formula,
<q>a church is a <emph>congregation</emph> of faithful men, in which
the pure word is preached and the sacraments duly
administered according to Christ's ordinances.</q> This
definition, in order to represent the common-sense
view, assumes that <q>faithful men</q> are persons who
believe in Christ's authority, as the Lord of all, and
who purpose to obey him.
</p>

<p>
It has been also shown, in a previous chapter, that
the church organizations based on the Augustinian
theory, are gradually modifying their practice so as
more and more to recognize the common-sense principle.
</p>

<p>
It is believed that this process of quiet change is to
be greatly accelerated by <emph>discussion</emph>. The people are
not aware that the mode of church organization and
discipline now most prevalent is an <emph>innovation</emph>, which
has existed less than two centuries, and chiefly in this
country, and that there can be found no authority for
it, either in the Bible or church history. The word
<q>church,</q> as used in the New Testament, in the original
Greek means <emph>congregation</emph>, and includes all who
unite in one assembly to worship.
</p>

<p>
No case can be found in the Bible of any such
organization as corresponds with that which is now
called by the name of <q>church,</q> as distinct from the
<q>congregation.</q>
</p>

<p>
These being facts, the whole matter of church organization
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
and discipline is soon to become a matter
of general discussion, the result of which, of course,
can not be predicted in any details. But it is certain
that the more discussion there is, the more the common-sense
system will become dominant. And it is
certain that the portion of the people connected with
churches will more and more demand discussion. They
will assume that their pastors are not to be their authoritative,
dogmatic teachers; but their leaders in
worship and ordinances; their presiding officers in
discussions, and the administers of much of that kind
of knowledge needed by the people, to enable them
to act independently in interpreting the Bible for
themselves.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What Women will do?</head>

<p>
The great principle of Protestantism, in distinction
from Catholicism, is, that every person is to be an independent
interpreter of the Bible, responsible to no
man or body of men; and that every person is to
<emph>protest</emph> against all that conflicts with this right.
</p>

<p>
This principle carried out consistently, makes theologians
and pastors a class sustained by the people,
not as dogmatic teachers of their own opinions, but
as persons set apart for the purpose of gaining and of
communicating to the people all the knowledge needful
to fit them to use their rights as <emph>authorized interpreters
of the Bible</emph>.
</p>

<p>
But though all Protestants hold this principle theoretically,
by far the larger portion have never practically
adopted it, but, as a matter of fact, go to theologians
and pastors for their <emph>opinions</emph>, and not for the
<emph>knowledge</emph> on which opinions are to rest. Thus it is
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
that ecclesiastics control the faith of a large portion
of the Protestant churches, as authoritatively as do
the pope and priests control that of the Catholic
church.
</p>

<p>
We have seen, in the case of Isabella of Spain, one
of the most benevolent, conscientious and lovely of
women led on to the most unjust and cruel deeds,
simply from practically adopting the principle, that
her religious teachers must be authoritative guides of
her opinions, and that her own common sense and
moral sense must bow to ecclesiastical dictation.
</p>

<p>
The present time is one in which the women of this
country must decide in regard to this same principle
and on practical questions of the deepest moment.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown, that with small exceptions, the
Catholic and Protestant theologians and clergy unite
in teaching a depravity of <emph>nature</emph> in every human being,
involving these questions:
</p>

<p>
Are we so depraved as to be incapacitated to interpret
the Bible, and made dependent on ecclesiastical
and regenerated persons to interpret for us?
</p>

<p>
Does the <emph>invisible true church</emph> consist only of those
whose <emph>nature</emph> has been re-created, or of those who,
without any newly-created nature, truly desire and
purpose to use all their natural powers according to
the teachings of Christ?
</p>

<p>
Does a <q><emph>visible church of Christ</emph></q> consist of persons
possessing a newly-created nature, by which alone any
truly virtuous acts can be performed, or does it consist
of persons who unite to sustain the public worship,
ordinances and teachings of Jesus Christ?
</p>

<p>
Are children to be trained to believe that all their
feelings and actions are <q>sin and only sin,</q> till they
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
receive a new nature from God, or be taught that
whenever they choose what is <emph>right</emph>, with the <emph>intention</emph>
to do right, they act virtuously and please
God?
</p>

<p>
Are children to be allowed to come to the table of
their Lord and Saviour as soon as they can understand
the nature of the ordinance, and wish and intend
to obey Jesus Christ in all things, or are they to
be excluded until church officers decide whether the
signs of a <emph>new nature</emph> are to be found?
</p>

<p>
Are women and children to be excluded from the
Lord's table because they interpret the Bible diversely
from the church with which they worship?
</p>

<p>
These are the practical questions involved in the
doctrine of the depraved nature of man, as taught by
the clergy of the great Christian sects.
</p>

<p>
It has been stated that many intelligent and pious
women in various parts of our country have already
quietly assumed their rights as authorized interpreters
of the Bible on all these questions, have cast off the
Augustinian theory, and thus, in fret, have set themselves
in opposition to the clergy, except so far as the
clergy themselves have come to the same results. The
writer, in this work, has done little more than has also
been done by many pious and intelligent mothers and
teachers, except to define, methodize and publicly express
opinions which other women have <emph>practically</emph>
adopted in training children, as the result of their
own experience, common sense and study of the
Bible.
</p>

<p>
Some of the leading organs of the High Church
party in the Episcopal church, and thus the most
strenuous defenders of ecclesiastical infallibility and
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
authority, in noticing the writer's volume, <hi rend='italic'>Common
Sense Applied to Religion</hi>, previously referred to, ask
with <emph>naive</emph> simplicity, what right has a woman to apply
common sense to religion, or to have any opinions
except as she is taught them by the church, at the
same time sneering at the idea, that <q>the dear people</q>
are competent to understand and interpret the
Bible for themselves.
</p>

<p>
This shows that the issue is now fairly presented and
understood. The ecclesiastical party, more or less,
openly claim that the only authorized interpreters of
the Bible are the ordained priesthood, or the regenerated
church. On the other hand, the people, and
women, as that half of the people to whom the training
of the human mind is especially committed, maintain
that they are ordained to this office by a Higher
Power and by the imposition of a nobler hand than
any who boast an uninterrupted apostolical succession.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it is claimed that every well-educated,
pious woman of good common sense, who has trained
young children, is <emph>better</emph> qualified to interpret the Bible
correctly, on all points pertaining to such practical duties,
than most theologians possibly can be. And the
reasons are, that she is free from those biasing difficulties
which have been pointed out as embarrassing
theologians, while all her employments and all her
culture eminently tend to aid rather than to embarrass
her judgment on such subjects.
</p>

<p>
Add, also, that the Bible was written for common
people, and not for metaphysicians, and in the language
of common life, and not in theological terms,
and that if it teaches the system of common sense, it is
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
better fitted to the apprehension of those whose training
has been practical rather than scholastic.
</p>

<p>
Finally, the promises of aid from the Author of
the Bible, is to the meek and lowly of heart. <q><emph>The
meek</emph> will he guide in judgment; <emph>the meek</emph> will he
teach his way.</q> That the position of those accustomed
to rule and teach is as favorable to the cultivation
of a meek, humble and teachable spirit as that of
those trained to learn and to obey, few will maintain.
</p>

<p>
These facts being so, it is believed that ere long the
greater portion of the most intelligent and conscientious
women in this country, will gradually and quietly
take this course. They will perceive that they
are bound, not only to assume and exercise the distinctive
rights of Protestantism, as authorized interpreters
of the Bible, but to <emph>protest</emph>, by word and deed,
against all that opposes the exercise of these rights.
</p>

<p>
In accordance with this, they will respectfully and
privately express to their pastor and fellow-Christians
their <emph>protest</emph> against the Augustinian system, as involving
a dreadful slander on their Lord and Saviour,
vailing in mystery and gloom his lovely character,
which is the light and life of the soul; they will protest
against every creed or confession or church ordinance
that is based on this system, as an indorsement
of this fatal slander; they will protest against being
regarded as members of a church in any other sense
than as persons united with a <emph>congregation</emph> to sustain
the worship and ordinances instituted by Christ, and
to aid each other in obeying his word; they will make
it clear to all concerned, that they do not claim to
possess any other <emph>nature</emph> than that received from God
at birth, nor to be regenerated in any other sense than
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
that they now desire and sincerely purpose to obey
Christ in all things.
</p>

<p>
They will, moreover, protest against the exclusion
of themselves or their children from the Lord's table,
for interpreting the Bible diversely from the church
with which they worship, and against the interference
of church officers to examine them or their children in
order to ascertain their mode of interpreting the Bible
or the any other signs of regeneration, than the expressed
desire to unite with the congregation in the
worship and ordinances appointed by Christ.
</p>

<p>
Should such a course as this result in exclusion
from the Lord's table, those thus protesting can depart
peaceably to some church which could conscientiously
receive them on such terms. And if no such
church is to be found, they can quietly relinquish the
privilege, until such time as it can be enjoyed without
a sacrifice of principle and religious liberty.
</p>

<p>
If those thus protesting act consistently, they will
accord to the church excluding them the same liberty
to interpret the Bible, in regard to duty on this subject,
as they claim for themselves. The church in cutting
them off may feel as conscientiously bound to the
course they adopt, according to their way of understanding
the Bible, as those do who protest and withdraw.
And if the true spirit of Christ, the spirit of
humility, meekness and love prevails, such disruptions
will occur without contentions or ill feelings on
either side.
</p>

<p>
But in churches embracing many who possess very
little of this spirit and cherishing the claim of infallibility,&mdash;first
in deciding which is the true church and
next in maintaining its dogmas,&mdash;there would result a
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
mode of dealing with such <emph>Protestants</emph> very similar to
that of former ages. This would lead to agitation and
discussion. But even on this trying alternative more
good than evil might be hoped, especially if those who
protest and withdraw, maintain the meek, peaceable
and quiet spirit required and exhibited by their Master.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What Young America will do?</head>

<p>
The higher the development of humanity, the
more the capacities for enjoyment and suffering are
increased, and the more civilization multiplies the
means and modes of gratifying increasing desires, the
stronger becomes the deep-felt anxiety in regard to
the invisible future. Are all these capacities, so infinite
in their tendencies, to expand for ever, only to be
wrenched and crossed and baffled as they are in this
life? What are our dangers? What are we to do
to escape them? This is more and more the agonizing
demand of humanity.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown that a system of doctrine has
been forced upon Christendom which has shrouded
this great question in mysterious gloom. It has been
shown also that the great <emph>organizations</emph> of the religious
world are so vitally based on this system that its renunciation
involves their certain dissolution. And though
the advance of humanity has, more or less, modified
the opinions and practice of the individuals embraced
in such organizations, still the <emph>principle</emph> remains unchanged.
Consequently any formal, open attack on
this principle involves the combined antagonism of all
the most powerful religious organizations of society.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Free</emph> discussion is not to be expected in our theological
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
schools, where the young men know that they
can not be recommended for license if they fail to
adopt the creed of their sect. Nor can it be found in
our colleges, most of which depend for patronage on,
or are pledged to the interests of a sect. Nor can it
be expected in our pulpits, where the minister teaches
and the people have no chance of rejoinder or disputation.
Nor can it be expected of the religious press,
which is also bound to sustain sectarian interests.
What power is there then which can contend against
such portentous combinations, sustained not only by
the prestige of ages and all the innate forces of long-drilled
organizations, but by the honest and conscientious
convictions of the great majorities thus enrolled?
</p>

<p>
It is <emph>the power of truth evolved by free discussion</emph>, and
mainly as it is and will be administered in the hands
of <emph>Young America</emph> and <emph>the secular press</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The young men of the nation have the control of
their literary societies in our colleges and seminaries,
and of the popular lyceums and other associations,
where every member has a vote in deciding what shall
be discussed; and here the battle will be fought for
religious liberty and the Bible.
</p>

<p>
In this conflict there will appear two distinct classes.
The first will be those of shallow capacity and acquirements,
who, perceiving themselves to be in the party
of reason and common sense, will imagine that they
have acquired this position, not by the progress of
the age, brought about to a great extent by the discussions,
the labors and sufferings of wise and good
men, many of them distinguished as metaphysicians
and theologians, but that it is all owing to their own
remarkable genius and independent thought. Thus
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
they will become <q>heady, high-minded,</q> rash and
contemptuous. Of these, some will be borne away to
utter skepticism, immorality and final ruin. Others,
unable to reason correctly, and bewildered by the
conflict, will swing around to the opposite extreme,
and enter a church where they can rest their faith on
a priesthood claiming to be heaven-inspired, which
shall decide all questions of faith and practice for
them.
</p>

<p>
But the nobler portion of Young America will understand
truly their great mission, and, taught by the
mistakes and darkness of the past, with a modest and
humble sense of their own inability to go forward
without help, both from God and their fellow-men,
will seek for truth, duty and happiness in the appropriate
path of <emph>calm</emph>, <emph>honest</emph>, <emph>fair</emph> and <emph>free discussion</emph>.
And their generous hearts and strong arms will be
shield and buckler even to the feeblest who may enter
the lists.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What the Religious Press will do?</head>

<p>
This question is the most perplexing of all, at least
to those who have attentively marked the recent developments
in the religious world.
</p>

<p>
What is there that more clearly defies at once the
moral sense, the common sense and the teachings of
the Bible, than the system of slavery as it now exists
in this country, and yet a majority of not only editors,
but of the ministers of Christ, in some of our
most intelligent and large denominations, openly refuse
freedom of discourse on this subject; nay, more,
some of the religious papers are openly justifying the
slave trade, which politicians, even those without any
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
pretensions to religious principle, have placed as piracy,
the highest civil crime.
</p>

<p>
And the last year has witnessed the deliberate
crushing of free debate on this subject, in one of
our largest and most effective benevolent associations.
And some of those whose whole lives have exhibited
them among the most amiable, conscientious and
exemplary men, are to be found upholding such a
course.
</p>

<p>
Who then can predict what will be the course of
the religious press, when every editor must maintain
the distinctive tenets of a sect, or at once lose his professional
character and his income?
</p>

<p>
It is very easy to predict what will be the course
of those who will make no sacrifice for truth. A
large portion will neither read, or think or discuss,
or, so far as they have power to prevent, allow others
to do so. Some will take this course in the satisfied
belief that they, and the church which they have infallibly
decided to be infallible, can never err. Others
will avoid all discussion for fear of being convinced
of mistakes, obliging them, if acknowledged, to sacrifices
of pride, character and income.
</p>

<p>
Others will make some show of discussion, so far
as to use the disgraceful arts sometimes resorted to,
in order to satisfy and blind ignorant and unreflecting
readers. Unfair and garbled quotations, misstatement
of facts, depreciating implications of character
and motives, invidious allusions to family or party
connections, the use of unpopular terms, which humbler
minds have been trained to regard as designating
the most dangerous and destructive heresies,
these, and many other discreditable methods, will
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
probably be employed to stave off discussion, or to
nullify its power.
</p>

<p>
But there is a class of minds who have access to
the religious press, and can more or less control its
action, who are far above such humiliating littleness
and dishonesty. In regard to these, such are the
influence of education and long-trained habits of
thought, that an entire change of a <emph>whole system</emph> must
be a gradual process. And when sermons, lectures,
books and pulpit ministries have all been in accordance
with one system, they can not be modified to
meet another without many practical difficulties. Nor
can men, whose professional associations with ecclesiastical
bodies and with parishes impede them, settle
many practical questions involved in any change of
views, without demanding <emph>time</emph> for reflection, examination
and consultation.
</p>

<p>
In this position of affairs in the religious world, a
measure of retention, and even of protracted silence,
in many cases, may be wise and justifiable. And
charges of compromise, or of cowardice, or of intellectual
deficiency, in such cases, would be false, ungenerous
and unjust. All this should be taken into
account in judging of the future action of those who
control the religious periodicals and literature.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What the Secular Press will do?</head>

<p>
The answer to this question is much more clear than
the preceding one, inasmuch as the secular press, to
a great extent, is free from the embarrassments that
restrain the religious press.
</p>

<p>
It has become so manifest that the great body of
the people are determined to enjoy perfect liberty of
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
conscience, and to defend the right of free discussion
in religion and morals, as well as in politics, that it is
clearly for the interests of editors, not committed to
sectarianism, to uphold these rights.
</p>

<p>
The distinguished popularity and success of that
Daily which now boasts the largest circulation in
the nation, is a most significant fact. Its career
began long before the religious world had its distinctive
tenets rudely assailed by any but ecclesiastical
hands, and long before the secular press ventured
to bring its common-sense maxims to bear on
religious topics.
</p>

<p>
Single-handed, it fearlessly opened its columns to
discussions on Fourierism, women's rights, intemperance,
slavery, religious doctrines, and all other matters
that concerned the public weal, giving every
party a fair chance to speak for itself. The religious
world took the lead in the outcry and alarm against
this course. But <emph>the people</emph>, and even a large proportion
of the <emph>religious people</emph>, sustained this attempt at
fair and free discussion, so honestly and fearlessly
pursued, until the battle was fairly won. And now
it is probable that the larger proportion of the most
candid and intelligent editors of the secular press perceive
that their pecuniary interests, in regard to free
religious discussion, are in the same direction as their
reason and conscience.
</p>

<p>
This being so, it is probable that the most powerful,
fair and effective discussions of the grand
question of life hereafter, will be found more in
the secular than in the religious press, at least for
a considerable period of time.
</p>

<p>
Should this be so, there would probably be an
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
improvement in <emph>modes</emph> of discussion in several respects.
</p>

<p>
Among these may be anticipated an advance in a
spirit of Christian humility, charity and of gentlemanly
courtesy in dealing with the character and motives
of those whose opinions, either in religion or morals,
are discussed. The true spirit of Christian charity demands
that we endeavor to present the best rather than
the <emph>worst</emph> construction of our opponent's character,
motives and arguments.
</p>

<p>
A true humility implies such a self-distrust, and
such a sense of our need of aid in discovering truth,
not only from God but from our fellow-men, as will
be indicated in a modest and unimpassioned exhibition
of opinions and arguments, and a courteous reception
of all criticisms and counter arguments. With
this spirit the weakness or mistakes, or sophistries of
an opponent would be exhibited more in sorrow than
in triumph or scorn.
</p>

<p>
A true gentlemanly courtesy would enforce the
same rules of delicacy and good breeding in public
encounters as are regarded by well-bred persons in
the drawing room. This would necessarily banish all
allusion to personal or family failings, and all invidious
or disrespectful modes of address or language.
</p>

<p>
No one who is familiar with the controversies on
doctrine and morals, as conducted in the religious papers,
can doubt that there is room for improvement
in all these particulars.
</p>

<p>
Such improvement is to be anticipated, not on account
of any mental or moral superiority of the conductors
of the secular press, but rather from the fact
that they are free from many of the embarrassments
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
and exciting influences already pointed out as surrounding
those who conduct the religious periodicals.
</p>

<p>
Another improvement to be anticipated is the withdrawal
of the great questions in debate from the mists
of metaphysical and theological technics to the clear,
popular language of common life.
</p>

<p>
In the preceding pages it is shown that the most
important questions of religious truth and duty can
be discussed in the language of common life, so as to
be made intelligible to all persons of ordinary education,
who are sufficiently interested to give their attention
to matters which demand intellectual exertion.
Men will find that they must <q><emph>labor</emph> to enter
into the strait gate,</q> intellectually as well as morally,
and that they are to <q><emph>work</emph> out their own salvation
with fear and trembling,</q> while thus they will learn
to understand the nature of the encouraging assurance
that <q>it is God that worketh in us <hi rend='italic'>to will and
to do</hi> of his own good pleasure.</q>
</p>

<p>
When, therefore, the secular press and the popular
lyceum take up these great questions they will insist
that the discussions shall be carried on in popular
language, so that the labor demanded shall not be increased
by the unknown tongue of theological and
metaphysical science.
</p>

<p>
Again, there will be an improvement in the mode
of conducting such discussions, by the banishment of
all adventitious topics and the firm grasping of the
one great fundamental point in debate. It will be insisted
that the question is not at all whether Arminians
or Universalists, or Unitarians hold this or that
opinion, nor whether advocating such and such views
would injure the cause of this or that institution, or
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
sect or individual; nor whether this or that person
has certain faults, or is a proper advocate of some innovations;
nor whether undesirable results would follow
from expressing certain views, but simply <emph>what is
the truth</emph>, so far as it can be discovered by honest statements
and fair discussion.
</p>

<p>
The grand question in debate is not whether men
are <emph>depraved</emph> in <emph>character and action</emph> as they appear in
the history of the world. All parties agree in the <emph>fact</emph>
of such dreadful depravity. The question is in regard
to the <emph>philosophy</emph> of this fact, that is to say, What is
the <emph>cause</emph> or reason of this depravity?
</p>

<p>
Here it will be found that two classes exist in all
the great Protestant sects, viz.:
</p>

<p>
Those who hold that the cause is a depraved <emph>nature</emph>,
[signifying what men mean when in common
life they use the terms, <emph>nature</emph>, <emph>organization</emph>, <emph>construction</emph>
or <emph>constitution</emph>,] and those who deny that any such
depraved nature exists. These two opposite opinions,
ever since the third century, have been expressed by
the terms, <emph>Augustinian</emph> and <emph>Pelagian</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The case is now so fairly and clearly before <emph>the people</emph>,
that every theologian who has capacity and training
sufficient to understand an argument must knowingly
do one of these things:
</p>

<p>
1. Deny depravity of <emph>nature</emph> and allow that he is a
Pelagian; or
</p>

<p>
2. Affirm such depravity, take rank as an Augustinian
and then meet the argument which, on this assumption,
destroys all evidence of the benevolence of
God, and renders a <emph>reliable</emph> revelation from him impossible.
</p>

<p>
3. Withdraw from all discussion either by entire
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
silence, or by hiding in the fogs of metaphysical and
theological technics, or by the disgraceful arts of debate
practiced to alarm and delude the ignorant.
</p>

<p>
Heretofore the editors of secular papers have practically
conceded that the religious disputes and conflicts
that agitated the churches were matters out of
their province and to be turned over to the clergy and
religious editors. And inasmuch as most of these
contentions have related to matters of rites and forms,
or to abstract doctrinal points having little <emph>practical</emph>
bearings on the daily life, such abstinence seemed appropriate.
But the progress of the age has at last
fairly brought the organized church front to front
with the unregenerate world on the greatest of all
<emph>practical</emph> questions-a question with which every editor
of every secular paper has as deep a personal and
family interest as has any religious editor, or any doctor
of theology, or any parochial pastor.
</p>

<p>
Is it <emph>a fact</emph>, or is it not, that every man at birth is
so depraved in <emph>nature</emph> that every one of his moral acts
is <emph>sin</emph>, <emph>and sin only</emph>, until a change in this <emph>nature</emph> is
wrought by the creative power of God, and must all
young children be educated on this assumption?
</p>

<p>
The training of the family, our institutions of education,
the church organizations of the great religious
sects, all depend on this question. The answer to it
must be <emph>yes</emph> or <emph>no</emph>, for no third supposition is possible.
Every <emph>intelligent</emph> man then must speak out in the affirmative,
or in the negative, or else hide in silence
or in the mists of deceit.
</p>

<p>
In this view of the case, it is believed that the
educated class of powerful and cultivated minds, who
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
are, by their position and talents, the leaders of the
secular press, will not turn this matter over to their
theological contributors, but will take the case into
their own hands, and fearlessly and earnestly meet
their high responsibilities.
</p>

<p>
Thus they may prove not only the most effective
leaders in the intellectual and moral advance of humanity,
but the protectors of many suffering, struggling
minds, who unaided would sink in the conflict
before them.
</p>

<p>
In this exhibition of the position of the religious
world, the attitude of this work is very remarkable.
It is in open and direct antagonism with <emph>all</emph> the religious
<emph>organizations</emph> of the Christian world, and that
too in regard to the very fundamentals on which each
of these organizations depends for its existence. All
the Augustinian sects are against the position of this
work, that the mind of man is <emph>perfect in nature</emph>, and
should they adopt the Pelagian ground <emph>consistently</emph>,
every one of them would either come to an end, or
change the very basis of its organization.
</p>

<p>
The only sect that openly and consistently avows
the Pelagian view, is the Unitarian; but this organization
is founded on the distinctive tenet of such a
unity in God as forbids the idea of a plurality of
eternal, self-existent Persons, having the highest attributes
of God. This is contrary to the system of
common sense, as exhibited in this work, page 100.
The Universalist organization is based on the doctrine
that none of the human race will continue sinful for
ever, and thus insure the natural consequences of
sin. This also is shown to be contrary to the system
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
of common sense, as presented in this work, page
177.
</p>

<p>
The great body of persons, as yet unorganized, who
agree in resisting the claims of the Bible as containing
reliable revelations from the Creator, and thus
<emph>authoritative</emph> rules of faith and practice, will be arrayed
against such claims maintained in this work, as
one of the inevitable results of the application of the
principles of common sense.
</p>

<p>
Consequently, the whole religious organizations of
the world, who rest their faith on the Bible, are antagonistic
to this work, while those who repudiate the
authority of the Bible are equally so.
</p>

<p>
Still more remarkable is the fact exhibited in this
volume, that the writer, in a family circle embracing
so many theologians and pastors, appears before the
public as antagonistic to most, and supported openly
by not one of them.
</p>

<p>
What then is the foundation of that confiding and
cheerful equanimity with which all this imposing array
of organizations and individual talents, learning
and influence is regarded? It is, first, confidence in
truth and the God of truth, and next, the intimate
knowledge gained by the writer, of the <emph>characters</emph> and
the <emph>mental experiences</emph> of some of the most powerful
minds that are leaders of this host, and at the same
time a similar knowledge of some of the noblest
minds, who are most effectively influencing that great
portion of the popular mind which is not embraced
in these organizations. Whatever may be the opinions
of these powerful classes, who may in form and
position appear antagonistic, they will never be leaders
in any attempt to crush perfect freedom of thought
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
and expression, or to restrain that free and earnest
discussion which is impending.
</p>

<p>
Nay more, if the distinctive feature of a follower
of Christ is to be humble and teachable in spirit,
<q>meek and lowly of heart,</q> and if that highest form
of human development is dawning, when moral magnanimity
shall take precedence of intellectual power
in human estimation, then the world will soon behold
what as yet has been deemed impossible, great and
learned men, even doctors in theology, nay more,
even men that have written books, resigning the
claim of infallibility, and confessing that they have
made mistakes.
</p>

<p>
The hope of this, moreover, is sustained by the
character and position of some, who not only stand
high in the theological world, but are among the most
revered and beloved in that family circle, where the
golden chain of perfect love has never for a moment
been sundered by the widest diversities of opinion or
the freest discussion of differences. What has transpired
in one Christian family, it is believed, may be
but the emblem of what is yet to prevail among the
true children of Him, <q>of whom the whole family
in heaven and on earth is named.</q><note place='foot'><ref target='Note_G'>Note G</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Note.</head>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The work often referred to in the preceding pages, was written,
at first, on a more limited plan than now appears. After a
portion was printed, it was perceived that the discussion contained
in this volume was indispensable, and the title at first designed
for the <emph>whole</emph> work, became inappropriate to the first portion
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
when issued alone. In making a change, the result has been, that
the work has sometimes been advertised by its first name, the
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bible and the People</hi>, and sometimes by its second name, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Common Sense
Applied to Religion</hi>, and sometimes by both together.
</p>

<p>
Hereafter, the title of the first volume will be <hi rend='smallcaps'>Common Sense
Applied to Religion</hi>. This volume is the second portion. The
final portion, not yet published, will be entitled <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Bible Interpreted
by Common Sense</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Notes.</head>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_A'/>
<head>Note A.</head>

<p>
The new school divines agree with the old school in teaching
that previous to regeneration every moral act is <emph>sin and only sin</emph>,
and that God has made no promises to unregenerate doings, which
would obligate him to re-create the soul, in return for such performances.
</p>

<p>
On the contrary, they urge man himself to change his own
heart, as that which is possible without any aid from God. And
the interference of God to regenerate is represented by them as
an act of sovereign, elective mercy, unbought by any labor or
striving on the part of man.
</p>

<p>
Still, they encourage the use of the means of grace as the way
in which God ordinarily meets the sinner, in bestowing this gift.
They urge that <emph>experience</emph> proves, that though regeneration is not
<emph>promised</emph> to the use of the means of grace, it is more frequently
bestowed on those who use them than on those who neglect
them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_B'/>
<head>Note B.</head>

<p>
There are three points on the subject of the future state, which
need to be discussed separately.
</p>

<p>
The first is, will there be an eventual separation of the human
race, at some final consummation, so that from that point, through
all eternity, there will be two separate communities, the good being
perfect in character and happiness, and the bad reaping the
natural results of their evil tempers and conduct <emph>for ever</emph>?
</p>

<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>

<p>
The second is, does our conduct in this life have an influence in
deciding our <emph>degrees</emph> of happiness or misery in a future state, so
that we reap the natural good or evil consequences of all we do
here <emph>for ever</emph>?
</p>

<p>
The third is entirely independent of the other two, and is this:
Is the <emph>eternal</emph> condition of <emph>every</emph> human being fixed <emph>at the hour of
death</emph>; or is there with <emph>some</emph> a continued process of culture and
discipline, and of upward and downward progress in a future
state, extending to the day of final separation and consummation?
</p>

<p>
That <emph>some</emph> may become so good in this life as to insure an eternal
upward progress, and that <emph>some</emph> may become so bad as to insure
a perpetual downward progress, may be true, and yet, to
others new opportunities may be given.
</p>

<p>
It is by <emph>revelations from the Creator</emph> alone that these points can
be effectually settled. It is shown in chapter 27, that every system
of religion or morals must be decided by these questions.
Therefore, these questions, and the authority of the Bible on these
points, must become the subject of renewed and earnest discussion.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_C'/>
<head>Note C.</head>

<p>
The doctrine of the Atonement can be regarded simply as a fact
without any reference to the philosophy of it, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the mode or
<emph>cause</emph> of this fact. <hi rend='italic'>Jesus Christ came into this world to save men
from sin and its inevitable penalties, by his teachings, sufferings and
death.</hi> This fact may be received without any attempt to explain
the <emph>why</emph> or the <emph>how</emph> it came to pass, or how it is made efficacious,
which are the <emph>philosophy</emph> of this fact.
</p>

<p>
In regard to this philosophy, various theories have been incorporated
into creeds and theological systems.
</p>

<p>
The most common theory at the present time, in this country,
is, that the sufferings and the death of Christ avail to sustain the
justice and the laws of God as effectually as would the infliction
of eternal misery on all who are regenerated. That is to say, if
by repentance and reformation, without an atonement, men should
escape all the penalties for past sin, the result would be that
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
God's justice would be impeached and his laws be nullified, just
as human lawgivers become unjust and their laws are made void
when all penalties are remitted. This difficulty, it is supposed, on
the common theory, was met by the sufferings and the death of
Jesus Christ, as a <emph>vicarious substitute</emph> in behalf of those saved.
That is to say, this atoning sacrifice operates to preserve the justice
of God and the efficiency of laws, as effectually as would the
eternal punishment, from which all regenerated persons are thus
rescued.
</p>

<p>
This mode of explaining the <emph>why</emph> and the <emph>how</emph> may be relinquished
and another mode adopted, or no theory at all may be
deemed needful, while belief may remain in the great <emph>fact</emph>, that
Jesus Christ wrought out the salvation of those who are saved,
by his advent, sufferings and death, and that they could be saved
by no other mode.
</p>

<p>
It is very important to recognize this distinction between the
<emph>fact</emph> and the <emph>philosophical theories</emph> invented to explain the fact; because
it is frequently the case that the denial of a theory is regarded
as a denial of the great fact, when such is not the case.
All may agree in the fact when very diverse theories are held to
explain it.
</p>

<p>
Whether our Creator actually has come in human form into
this world, and exhibited an example of <emph>self-sacrifice</emph> and <emph>suffering</emph>
for the general good, is what we may infer as <emph>probable</emph> by the light
of nature, but which we can <emph>fully prove</emph> only by revelation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_D'/>
<head>Note D.</head>

<p>
Whether the Creator ever communes with the human spirit
except through the material organizations, is one on which reason
and experience furnish no intimations.
</p>

<p>
No record is to be found of any communications from the Creator
to mankind that were not made either by visible forms or intelligible
sounds, or by visions and dreams in sleep. All the revelations
recorded in the Bible were by some one of these methods.
</p>

<p>
This being so, the system of common sense neither affirms or
denies the direct access of the creative mind to the minds of his
creatures. It is a question to be settled solely by revelation.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_E'/>
<head>Note E.</head>

<p>
This mode of explaining the depravity of mind is to be found
in the <hi rend='italic'>Conflict of Ages</hi>. On page 90 the following passage exhibits
the author's idea, both of a <emph>perfectly constructed mind</emph>, and
of a <emph>depraved mind</emph>:
</p>

<p>
<q>So there is a <emph>life of the mind</emph>. It involves an original and designed
correlation to God, and such a state of the affections, passions,
emotions, intellect and will, that communion with God shall
be <emph>natural</emph>, habitual, and the life of the soul. He who has been
so far healed by divine grace as to reach this state, has a true idea
of the <emph>normal</emph> and <emph>healthy state</emph> of the soul. And if he finds that
there is that <emph>in the state of his moral constitution and emotions</emph>
which seems to lie beneath his will and undermine its energy to
follow the convictions of reason and conscience, and that by divine
grace <emph>this has been changed</emph>, and an energy not only to will
but to do good is supplied, is it to be wondered at that, in some
way, he should come to the conclusion that there is in <emph>his nature</emph>
or <emph>moral constitution</emph>, <emph>depravity</emph> or <emph>pollution</emph>, anterior to the action
of the will?</q>
</p>

<p>
The theory which this author adopts is, that the <q>normal</q> state
of man's <q><emph>nature</emph> or moral <emph>constitution</emph></q> was created in man by
God in a preëxistent state, and that man's <q><emph>depravity</emph> or pollution
anterior to the action of the will</q> consists in <q>a habit of sinning,</q>
generated in this preëxistent state.
</p>

<p>
This habit of sinning was not a part of the perfectly-constructed
nature made by God. Man himself introduced it into his own
mind, thus rendering it so depraved that every moral act is sin,
and only sin.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Regeneration</emph>, according to this theory, consists in a change of
the <q>state of the moral constitution,</q> whereby <q>an energy not
only <emph>to will</emph> but <emph>to do good</emph> is supplied.</q> That is to say, the <q>habit
of sinning</q> can be lessened or removed by some supernatural
change of the <q>moral constitution</q> by God. And yet all men
are born with this depravity which God <emph>can</emph> remedy, and <emph>will not</emph>,
except for a select few.
</p>

<p>
It is manifest, therefore, that this writer holds to a depravity of
<emph>nature</emph> in the true and proper sense of the term, signifying constitution
or <emph>construction</emph>.
</p>

<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>

<p>
This being so, his theory puts it out of his power to prove the
benevolence of the Creator, or to establish any revelation from
him as a <emph>reliable</emph> guide to truth and happiness.
</p>

<p>
For it is the <emph>nature</emph> of any created thing which proves the character
and intentions of its creator. If then all human minds are
depraved in <emph>nature</emph> or <q>constitution,</q> the Creator of these minds
is thus proved to be depraved, and no revelations from him can be
<emph>reliable</emph>. He prefers sin and evil to virtue and happiness, and of
course his teachings can be no guide to truth, virtue and happiness.
Thus, by his own theory, this author is debarred from any
proof of a preëxistent state by revelation.
</p>

<p>
On page 20 it is further stated that <q>inasmuch <emph>as the mind of
man is depraved</emph>, and there may be <emph>danger in trusting</emph> its unrevised,
uncorrected decisions as to these principles [of honor and
right], it is of great importance, for purposes of revision, carefully
to study those developments of benevolent, honorable and just
feelings, towards which the human mind, <emph>after regeneration</emph>, and
under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, is found most directly to
tend.</q>
</p>

<p>
This passage shows that this depravity of the <q>moral constitution,</q>
generated in a preëxistent state, in the view of this author,
is such that there is danger in trusting our mental decisions as
to the principles of honor and right at first implanted by God, but
vitiated and impaired by the <q>habit of sinning.</q> This danger, it
is suggested, is lessened <q>after regeneration,</q> so that regenerated
persons are thus entitled to guide their unregenerate fellow-men
in matters of truth and duty. This lays the foundation for the
claims of a regenerate church and clergy to superior authority in
deciding on the interpretations of the Bible. The tendencies of
such claims to pride, dogmatism and persecution, are pointed out
in chapter 41.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_F'/>
<head>Note F.</head>

<p>
The following extract from the <hi rend='italic'>Views and Experiences of Religion</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>by Henry Ward Beecher</hi>, is an example of the vagueness and
uncertainty referred to. It is part of an article entitled <hi rend='italic'>How to
Become a Christian</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The moment you realize this goodness of Christ, his helpfulness
to you, his lenient, forgiving, sympathizing spirit, then you
know what <emph>faith in Christ</emph> means. If such a Saviour attracts you,
and you strive all the more ardently, from love toward him and
trust in him, then you are a Christian: <emph>not a religious man</emph>, but <emph>a
Christian</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A man may worship through awe, or through a sense of duty,
and I think there are hundreds of men in the churches who are
<emph>only religious men</emph>, and <emph>not Christians</emph>. A man who feels toward
God only awe or fear, who obeys merely from a <emph>sense of duty</emph>, who
is under the dominion of <emph>conscience</emph> rather than of love, may be
religious, but he is <emph>not a Christian</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is nothing said in this article of any need of any new
creation of <emph>the nature</emph> of the mind; nor is this Augustinian dogma
to be found in any of this author's published works.
</p>

<p>
In this article, written expressly to give clear views of what it
is to become a Christian, and <emph>how</emph> to do it, we find it taught <q>a
man who feels toward God only awe or fear, who obeys merely
from a sense of duty, who is <emph>under the dominion of conscience</emph> rather
than of love, may be <emph>religious</emph>, but <emph>he is not a Christian</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
Suppose, then, a person with a strong sense of justice and great
natural benevolence, is trained to believe the Calvinistic form of
the Augustinian system, so that God appears to him only the awful,
incomprehensible author of this dreadful system, and Jesus
Christ, this same God, so united to a man (as this transaction is
usually represented) that the human soul alone bears all the grief
and suffering involved in the expiatory sacrifice demanded. Suppose,
also, that, in this view, unable to feel any emotions but fear
and awe, he says, <q><emph>There must be a dreadful mistake somewhere</emph>.
I can not fathom it; but I can and will do this: I will trust the
word of Jesus Christ as to the character of God, and I will <emph>obey
his teachings conscientiously</emph> in all things, as nearly as I am able;</q>
and this determination is carried out in his life.
</p>

<p>
Is such a man a Christian, or is he not? Guided only by the
above extract, it would be very difficult to decide, or to state what
is this author's view of regeneration; nor is there any thing in his
published writings to remove the vagueness and uncertainty caused
by such teachings as are embraced in the above extract, as to what
<emph>change</emph> makes a man a true Christian.
</p>

<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>

<p>
According to the system of common sense (as explained chapter
24, and also on page 258) to form and carry out a ruling purpose
to obey the laws of God, as made known by Jesus Christ,
is loving God and Christ in the only way in which love can justly
be made a subject of command. And when a man forms and
carries out such a purpose, he is <q>under the dominion of conscience,</q>
and is a true Christian.
</p>

<p>
The point where this writer seems to fail, in this extract, is, in
a want of the distinction, pointed out in the chapter above mentioned,
between <emph>voluntary</emph> and <emph>involuntary</emph> love. A person may
be <q>under the dominion of conscience,</q> by a purpose to obey all
the laws of God, and for want of the true view of God's character,
as exhibited in Jesus Christ, may experience only emotions
of fear and awe in performing such obedience.
</p>

<p>
It is the true, <emph>efficient</emph> purpose to obey Christ which constitutes
a man a Christian. It is right views of God's character, as seen in
Jesus Christ, that gives new <emph>strength</emph> to carry out such a purpose.
</p>

<p>
<q>When we were yet <emph>without strength</emph>, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly,</q> thus giving new motives of love and gratitude,
in addition to those of fear and awe. Not until all the false theories
that hitherto have vailed the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ
are cast away, will the full meaning of the above text be fully understood.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<anchor id='Note_G'/>
<head>Note G.</head>

<p>
Among theologians and pastors there are two classes now existing,
in all the great Protestant sects, the one holding to a <emph>real</emph>
depravity of <emph>nature</emph>, and striving to make such a fact consistent
with common sense and with the ideas of benevolence and justice
in the Creator; the other, holding only to a depravity of <emph>action</emph>
and of character, resulting from such action in this life, are striving
to evade open antagonism with the Augustinian theory.
</p>

<p>
No third position being possible, every man is necessarily Augustinian
or Pelagian; either holding that man <emph>is</emph> depraved <emph>in nature</emph>,
or that he is <emph>not</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In the first class, is one whom, above all others, the writer
would prefer to meet in a discussion on this great question.
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
It is one who is remembered in early life as the honest, serious,
book-loving boy; next as the earnest Christian and faithful student,
winning the highest honors of a collegiate course; next as
a student of theology called to several of the highest city pulpits,
even before finishing his preparatory course; next, even in youth,
the president of a flourishing western college, taking a decided
stand on the slavery question, defending the <emph>freedom of the press</emph>
with its first martyr, and very nearly sharing his fate; next resuming
the pastor's office, mainly to gain more freedom to write
and publish his peculiar views, which he well understood would
encounter all the organized interests of Christendom, and place a
drag-chain on all his personal and professional interests; finally,
one who, as scholar, metaphysician and theologian, in the writer's
view, has never been surpassed, while he never has, and never
will, resort to a cowardly or unfair mode to weaken or escape an
argument. Thus much, if not allowable toward a brother, may
be permitted toward an antagonist.
</p>

<p>
It is this brother who for years has been laboring to sustain the
Augustinian dogma by a theory which&mdash;could it be proved&mdash;is
the only one yet devised that is at once rational, intelligible and
actually secures the end designed. For if it were a fact that the
<emph>nature</emph> of mind is depraved, and if it were possible to prove that
our race originally, in a preëxistent state, were created with a
perfect nature, ruined themselves, and were born into this world
for purposes of pardon and redemption, the grand difficulty <emph>would</emph>
all be remedied, and God <emph>could</emph> be exhibited as wise, just and
good in spite of this mournful fact.
</p>

<p>
But it is <emph>the fact</emph> of the <emph>depraved nature</emph> of the human mind,
where the writer and this brother are at issue, and not on any
theory to relieve the difficulties incident to that fact.
</p>

<p>
The argument of this work, to prove that there is no possible
mode of proving the benevolence of God, or of proving that the
Bible is a reliable revelation from him, to any man who teaches
that the <emph>nature</emph> of the human mind is depraved in <emph>any</emph> sense that
can be made intelligible by human language, <emph>this</emph> is the place where
the author of the Conflict of Ages, in due time, will meet this discussion
fairly, openly and honorably.
</p>

<p>
In the second class, mentioned above, is another brother, whom
the writer believes to be as decidedly on the Pelagian ground.
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
Whether he yet fully understands his position, is not affirmed by
one, who has, for so short a time, fully understood her own bearings
in this matter. But ere long, the only question remaining
for him will be, whether he shall openly attack this strongly-entrenched
error, this wholesale slander on his Lord and Master, or
take the Tract Society mode of evading discussion. All who best
know the writer of the <hi rend='italic'>Star Papers</hi>, best understand that any
question of <emph>expediency</emph> will relate, not to the fearless, outspoken
exhibition of his opinions, but only to the <emph>time</emph> and <emph>manner</emph> in
which it shall be done. He must soon perceive that it is as much
his duty openly to attack the <emph>African</emph>[A] enslavement of Anglo-Saxon
<emph>minds</emph>, as it ever was to combat the Anglo-Saxon enslavement
of African <emph>bodies</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It will be noticed that this public appeal to family friends was
not made until all other theologians, especially obligated to meet
this discussion, had evaded it, and some of them by unfair, ungentlemanly
and unchristian methods.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected.]
</p>
</div>
</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
